In Fuller, Janet, Ho Han, and David Parkinson (eds.),
Proceedings of ESCOL 11. Ithaca, NY: DMLL Publications.

‘∀’-less in Wonderland?
Revisiting Any
Jason Eisner
University of Pennsylvania
1. Introduction
Is negative-polarity any an existential or a universal quantiﬁer? That
is, does the meaning of (1a) arise from the logical form (1b), or from the
equivalent LF (1c)?
(1) a. She had not been down any rabbit hole before.
b. ¬(∃h she had been down h before)
c. ∀h ¬(she had been down h before)
Ladusaw (1979), Carlson (1980), and Linebarger (1987) have all argued that negative-polarity any is an existential quantiﬁer that surfaces in
certain environments, notably in the scope of negation. Similarly, Kadmon &
Landman (1993) interpret it as an indeﬁnite with existential force. On these
analyses (1b) is the correct LF.
I will refer to these diverse accounts collectively as the ∃-account. They
are opposed to the earlier ∀-account proposed by Quine (1960) and Lasnik
(1972), which takes the underlying semantics of (1a) to be (1c).
An attractive feature of the ∀-account, and one very much on the minds
of its early proponents, is that it may allow the negative-polarity item any
(NPI any) to be accommodated to so-called “free-choice any” (FC any). FC
any is uncontroversially some sort of universal quantiﬁer, with a distribution
as fussy as that of NPI any. If the two are really the same lexeme acting in
the same way, then (2a) and (2b) are parallel sentences: any serves in each as
a wide-scope universal. (3) is similar.1
(2) a. The King’s horses can put anything back together again.
∀x Possible [reassemble(King’s horses, x)]
b. The King’s horses can’t put anything back together again.
¬Possible [∃x reassemble(King’s horses, x)] (∃-account)
∀x ¬Possible [reassemble(King’s horses, x)] (∀-account)
(3) a. A wise ﬁsh would go anywhere without a porpoise.
b. No wise ﬁsh would go anywhere without a porpoise.
In this paper I will argue for a new ∀-account, in which any is a single universal quantiﬁer whose idiosyncratic distribution and scope properties
follow largely from its unusual semantics.
The analysis actually has a good deal in common with the ∃-account of
Ladusaw (1980). Following Fauconnier (1975), Ladusaw argues that an NPI
must appear in an environment that makes it the least likely point on some
scale: for example, in a negated proposition.

(4) a. When I get to be a Duchess, I won’t have the tiniest amount of pepper
in my kitchen.
b. When I get to be a Duchess, I won’t have any pepper in my kitchen.
c. Implicature: I won’t have larger amounts in my kitchen, either.
On Ladusaw’s analysis, (4a) and perhaps (4b) implicate (4c). If the proposition “I won’t have x in my kitchen” holds for the least likely x on a scale, one
concludes that it holds of the entire scale. But this eﬀectively gives any universal force in this context. The ∀-account merely takes a more direct approach,
and says that the universal force is inherent in the semantics of any.
The present approach also concurs with Linebarger (1987) and the uniﬁed account of Kadmon & Landman (1993), in saying that any is not merely
licensed, but actually contributes information to a sentence. There is a subtle
diﬀerence, however. Both those accounts outline the general sort of information that any is to contribute—a negative implicature or an entailment—and
bar any from contexts where it is unable to make a suﬃcient contribution.
The ∀-account developed here will take the opposite tack. It will specify the
exact truth-conditional contribution of any, and bar any from contexts where
this contribution provides too much information.
2. NPI any is not an in situ existential
The ∀-account of NPI any claims that it is not an existential appearing
under negation, but rather a universal that takes scope over negation.
We can test this prediction as shown in (5). If any is an in situ existential, then the syntactic forms (5a) and (5b) should be interpreted similarly,
as (5c). But if the ∀-account is correct, (5a) and (5b) will have diﬀerent interpretations. That is, if (5b)’s any moves to quantify universally over negation,
as shown in (5d), it ends up quantifying over the intervening scopal element
S as well. S therefore applies to each possible x.
(5) a.
b.
c.
d.

· · · ¬(· · · S(· · · an x · · ·) · · ·) · · ·
· · · ¬(· · · S(· · · any x · · ·) · · ·) · · ·
· · · ¬(· · · S(· · · ∃x · · · x · · ·) · · ·) · · · (∃-account)
· · · ∀x ¬(· · · S(· · · x · · ·) · · ·) · · ·) · · · (∀-account)

Let us now consider examples with various choices for the scopal element S. In (6), S is Lewis’s favorite, a function that picks out a single element
from a set. Contrary to the prediction of the ∃-account, (6a) and (6b) do not
mean the same thing. (6a) mentions a single drawing-of-a-child—Lewis’s favorite from the set of all such drawings—that we haven’t seen. This reading
is given in (6c). But (6b) says we have missed multiple drawings: his favorite
from the set of drawings-of-Mary, his favorite from the set of drawings-of-Alice,
and so forth. This reading corresponds exactly to the ∀-account’s (6d).2
(6) a. We haven’t seen Lewis’s favorite drawing of a child.
b. We haven’t seen Lewis’s favorite drawing of any child.

c. ¬see(favorite({d : ∃c drawing-of(d, c)}))
d. ∀c ¬see(favorite({d : drawing-of(d, c)}))
(7) takes S to be the universal quantiﬁer every. (7a) can have either
of the readings in (7c), since the relative scope of every and a is ambiguous.
Both of these readings leave a within the scope of negation. Even so, the second one vanishes in (7b) when a is replaced by any. The ∀-account correctly
predicts that the only reading is (7d), which is equivalent to the ﬁrst reading
in (7c).
(7) a. I doubt that a snail danced with every whiting.
b. I doubt that any snail danced with every whiting.
c. doubt(∃s ∀w dance-with(s, w))
doubt(∀w ∃s dance-with(s, w))
d. ∀s doubt(∀w dance-with(s, w))
Finally, (8) makes use of the intensional verb prove. Again, (8a) is ambiguous between the two readings in (8c). If the court has proved that the thief
was a knave, without establishing which knave, then (8a) is true on the ﬁrst
reading and false on the second. By contrast, in this situation (8b) can only
be read as true. As the ∀-account predicts, only the ﬁrst reading—equivalent
to (8d)—is available.
(8) a. The court failed to prove that one of the knaves was guilty.
b. The court failed to prove that any one of the knaves was guilty.
c. ¬∃k prove(guilty(k))
¬prove(∃k guilty(k)))
d. ∀k ¬prove(guilty(k))
In short, the ∀-account correctly predicts the meanings of the sentences
above, while the ∃-account does not.
3. FC any also scopes over its licensor
At ﬁrst blush, the proposal that NPI any is a universal may seem
to require an awkward stipulation. It means that NPI any must always acquire scope over negation, even in environments like (9–10), which resist such
movement for other quantiﬁers and for indeﬁnites (Ladusaw 1979).
(9) a. Alice had never [drunk from any bottle and gotten sick].
∀b Never [drunk-from(Alice, b) ∧ got-sick(Alice)]
b. Alice had never [drunk from every bottle and gotten sick].
Never [(∀b drunk-from(Alice, b)) ∧ got-sick(Alice)]
(10) a. By now there wasn’t any cat on the branch: only a grin.
∀c ¬on(c, branch)
b. By now there wasn’t a cat on the branch: only a grin.
¬∃c on(c, branch)
*∃c ¬on(c, branch)

However, this unusual property is expected if NPI any is the same as
FC any, because FC any is independently forced to take wide scope. (11–
13) illustrate that FC any is interpreted semantically as scoping over a modal
or generic operator, even in an existential sentence. (14–16) show that it can
escape from NPs, adjuncts, and wh-questions even when every cannot.
(11) a. Anyone could have stolen the tarts.
*Possible [∀x stole(x, tarts)]
∀x Possible [stole(x, tarts)]
b. Everyone could have stolen the tarts.
Possible [∀x stole(x, tarts)]
∀x Possible [stole(x, tarts)]
(12) There could be anything at the bottom of this rabbit hole.
*Possible [∀x at-bottom(x, hole)]
∀x Possible [at-bottom(x, hole)]
(13) a. Any Jabberwock occasionally burbles when it comes whiﬄing.
∀j Occt [whiﬄe(t, j)][burble(t, j)]
b. A Jabberwock occasionally burbles when it comes whiﬄing.
Occt,j [whiﬄe(t, j)][burble(t, j)]
Genj [Occt [whiﬄe(t, j)][burble(t, j)]]
(14) a. They’d’ve quaked at a report that the Queen had beheaded anyone.
b. They’d’ve quaked at a report that the Queen had beheaded everyone.
(15) a. Fury ordered a hanging whenever any mouse was guilty.
b. Fury ordered a hanging whenever every mouse was guilty.
(16) a. The Caterpillar can summarize in an hour what any mushroom does.
b. The Caterpillar can summarize in an hour what every mushroom does.
The scope properties of any are actually a bit more complex than this.
As is well known, either type of any must appear syntactically in the scope of
an appropriate scopal element. The licensor for NPI any must be negation or
another aﬀective element, while FC any can be licensed by various operators,
notably modals of possibility and generics.
I want to claim that either form of any is interpreted as having raised
immediately over its licensor. So although it takes wide scope with respect
to the licensor, it does not always get matrix (widest possible) scope. Such
a claim is quite natural and necessary, since all of the FC and NPI sentences
above can be introduced by Harry told me that . . . without incurring a universal quantiﬁcation over the matrix verb told. The claim also allows the
∀-account to withstand a variety of examples oﬀered by Carlson (1980) and
similar to (17):
(17) The Mock Turtle begged Alice not to eat any soup.
beg(∀s ¬eat(Alice, s))
*∀s beg(¬eat(Alice, s))
An any-sentence with no licensor has no landing site for the quantiﬁer,
and is ungrammatical. An any-sentence with multiple licensors—regardless of

whether they are NPI or FC licensors—is ambiguous:
(18) The White King was willing to say that his Lion could beat any Unicorn.
*Possible [say(King,Possible [∀u beat(Lion,u)])]
Possible [say(King,∀u Possible [beat(Lion,u)])]
*Possible [∀u say(King,Possible [beat(Lion,u)])]
∀u Possible [say(King,Possible [beat(Lion,u)])]
(19) I doubt that Alice can tell her cat to attack any mouse.
doubt(Possible [tell(Alice, Dinah, ∀m attack(Dinah,m))])
*doubt(Possible [∀m tell(Alice, Dinah, attack(Dinah,m))])
doubt(∀m Possible [tell(Alice, Dinah, attack(Dinah,m))])
∀m doubt(Possible [tell(Alice, Dinah, attack(Dinah,m))])
4. Towards a uniﬁed account of any-licensors
If NPI any and FC any are really the same any, then how are we to
characterize the diverse environments in which it appears? Ladusaw’s (1980)
generalization, that any appears in the downward-entailing environments, is
no longer applicable once the FC contexts are taken into account. Linebarger’s
(1987) generalization, that it appears in the scope of overt or implicated negation, does not cover FC sentences either.
negation: Tweedledee *(never) noticed any crows in time.
antecedents of conditionals: If she feeds him any more pepper . . .
restrictive scope of certain determiners: All/*Some children with any
curiosity . . .
yes-no questions: The Red Queen knew whether/*why she was about to
suﬀer any pinpricks.
modals of possibility: Anyone could/*must have stolen the tarts.
generics: A cautious boy shuns/*shunned any frumious Bandersnatch.
untensed verbs that do not inherit event variables (e.g., attack in (19)):
told/*tried/*helped to attack any mouse; habit/*instance of attacking
any mouse
The shared property of all these environments, as we will see, is that
they do not assert any deﬁnite events of the any-NP. This property has often been noted for FC any environments: Ladusaw (1979) takes the crucial
factor to be “whether the sentence receives a kind of non-event or generic reading.” It is striking that the negative-polarity environments also fall under this
characterization.
The unifying fact about FC and NPI any, then, is that the quantiﬁer
must always raise at LF to create a proposition of the form ∀x Φ(x), where
Φ is a non-eventive predicate. There may be more than one way for this to
happen, as in the ambiguous sentences (18–19). But in the absence of such a
predicate, as with (20b), the sentence is ungrammatical.

(20) a. I’ve never seen any baby turn into a pig before.
b. *I’ve seen any baby turn into a pig before.
c. I’ve seen every single baby in the universe turn into a pig before.
What gives rise to this pattern? One has an intuition that the meaning of (20b) would have to be something like (20c), so that (20b) makes an
absurdly strong statement about having seen even the most faraway and unlikely babies. It is tempting to say that this sort of absurdity lies behind
the unacceptability of eventive any-sentences like (20b). But since the strong
statement of (20c) is not by itself unacceptable, (20b) must be somehow worse.
I propose a sort of formal trick: to suppose that any actually has a
wider domain of quantiﬁcation than every, so that (20b) makes a stronger
statement than (20c). Recall that in possible-worlds semantics, a given entity may satisfy a diﬀerent set of predicates in each world. For example, (21)
picks out an entity h and states that in every epistemically accessible world,
h passed Nobody on the road. There are also worlds which h was never born,
does not exist, and has never walked down a road at all (although perhaps he
still has the individual-level properties of being clumsy, liking hay, etc.).
(21) The King’s messenger, Haigha, must have passed Nobody on the road.
The formal proposal is that any quantiﬁes over the universe of all entities in
the model, without prejudice to their existence or non-existence. So “any messenger” refers to both the “real” messengers that exist in the current world
and the “irreal” messengers that exist only in various other worlds. The irreal
messengers do not, of course, participate in the current world’s events: we will
have to suppose further that their participation is not only false, but cannot
even be asserted grammatically.3
The facts now fall out nicely. (22a) is unacceptable, because it claims
that irreal persons have committed crimes in the current world. (22b) is even
worse: here the crimes are being committed not only in our world, but in every accessible world. But (22c–22d) are perfectly acceptable. (22c) states only
that each person stole the tarts in some world—one where he or she presumably existed. And (22d) does not make any eventive assertions at all.
(22) a.
b.
c.
d.

*The
*The
The
The

tarts
tarts
tarts
tarts

were stolen by anyone.
must have been stolen by anyone.
could have been stolen by anyone.
weren’t stolen by anyone.

Now consider “every” and “some” in (23). The every sentence says
that given any (real or irreal) bottle b, it is true that every (real) child who
drank from b shrank to three inches. The statement is vacuous if the set of all
children who drank from b is empty—as it certainly is when b does not exist.
Thus the sentence does not improperly predicate any event of an irreal bottle.


 Every child




 No child



 *Some child

















who drank from any bottle shrank to a
(23) a.  Most children
 height of three inches.

 At most ﬁve children 







 *Lots of children









 *Five children

b. ∀b Qc [drank(c, b)][shrank(c, 3)]
By contrast, the some sentence says any bottle b has the property that a child
who drank from it shrank. This entails that b was actually consumed—an
impermissible assertion when b is irreal.
It is easy to prove that on this theory, non-trivial determiners will permit any where they are downward entailing (Ladusaw 1979), and exclude any
where they are upward entailing (Progovac 1993). The result applies to both
restrictive and nuclear scope.
The theory also explains why any is permitted in the restrictive scope
of most, which is neither upward nor downward entailing. The most sentence
says that for any bottle b, a large proportion of the children who drank from
b shrank. This does not entail that any child actually did drink from b, so the
sentence is acceptable.4
Many more examples could be given, such as before vs. after. (24a)
does not claim that oysters have been or ever will be eaten, but (24b) improperly asserts that all oysters, real and irreal, were eaten before the sweeping
began.
(24) a. They swept the beach before they ate any oysters.
b. *They swept the beach after they ate any oysters.
5. Additional consequences of irreal quantiﬁcation
The previous section presented irreal quantiﬁcation as a formal device—
a device stipulated in order to prevent any from asserting Φ(x), when Φ was
eventive or upward-entailing on x.
However, the account has additional motivation. It helps to explain
two pervasive but rarely discussed facts about any: its causal ﬂavor and its
preference for modiﬁed NPs.
As Kadmon & Landman (1993) point out, any has the important feature that it strengthens the statement it appears in. While they take this to
be a lexical condition on the occurrence of any, the irreal quantiﬁcation theory predicts it as an eﬀect. For example, (25a) is predicted to be stronger
than (25b). Both are universal sentences, identical except for their restrictive
scopes; and since (25a)’s restrictive scope is a superset of (25b)’s, (25a) should
downward-entail (25b).
(25) a. Any knave could have stolen the tarts.
b. Each knave could have stolen the tarts.

In fact (25a) is not only stronger: it is stronger in exactly the right way. (25b)
is true if the four Knaves of Clubs, Hearts, Spades and Diamonds each had
a chance to steal the tarts—even if only by a monstrous coincidence. But
(25a) has tighter truth conditions. It says that each Knave had access to the
tarts merely by virtue of being a knave. This meaning is predicted by the
irreal quantiﬁcation theory, under which even non-existent knaves in (25a)
could have stolen the tarts. In other words, any conveys causality by way of a
counterfactual entailment: “If k were an arbitrary knave, with whatever other
properties, k could have stolen the tarts.”
It is worth noting brieﬂy that there are independent tests for causality. Consider the contrast between notice, which suggests knowledge without
a theory, and suspect, which suggests a theory without knowledge. Because
notice has no theory, it coexists comfortably with happens to but not with
any.
(26) I

notice
*suspect

that everyone here happens to be dead.

(27) I

*notice
suspect

that anyone here is dead.

The other curious feature of any that I would like to point out is that
unlicensed any-NPs often improve substantially when modiﬁers are adjoined.
(28) a.
b.
(29) a.
b.
(30) a.
b.

*Yesterday Bill slew any Jabberwock.
Yesterday Bill slew any Jabberwock he found.
*Any creature is still here playing croquet.
Any creature that curtsied to the Queen is still here playing croquet.
*Anyone must have stolen at least one tart.
Anyone who is in this room must have stolen at least one tart.

Any syntactic account of this fact would have to be extremely ingenious: why
should an adjunct improve the acceptability of an NP (particularly if the NP
must raise at LF)? But irreal quantiﬁcation provides an explanation. The
(a) sentences above are unacceptable because they quantify indiscriminately
over all Jabberwocks, creatures, or humans, whether real or irreal. The (b)
sentences have tighter restrictive clauses that only real entities can satisfy:
only real entities can have a location, make a curtsy, or be found. So the (b)
sentences make assertions only about real entities, and are acceptable.
6. Arguments against the ∀-account
The previous sections have argued that NPI any should be analyzed
as a universal and accomodated to FC any. First, scope tests suggest that at
least some instances of NPI any have wide scope and universal force, contrary
to the ∃-account. Second, a univeral treatment of NPI any gives it exactly the
same scope properties as FC any. Third, the FC and NPI environments form
a natural class. And fourth, there is a semantic account of that class that ex-

plains not only facts about any’s distribution, but also its scope properties,
its sense of causality, and its willingness to enter hostile environments with a
modiﬁer at its side.
Carlson (1980) and Ladusaw (1979) give several interesting arguments
against treating NPI any as a universal. In earlier sections, this paper brieﬂy
addressed two such arguments: that existential sentences like (10) would prohibit NPI any from taking wide scope, and that the meanings of sentences like
(17) are not captured if NPI any takes matrix scope. This ﬁnal section will
discuss two other important counterarguments.
Ladusaw (1979) notes that the ∀-account fails on sentences such as (31),
which does not have the predicted meaning (32a). Unless we treat any as an
existential, as in (32b), we must lexically decompose rarely into usually+not.
The result is shown in (32c).
(31) Bill the lizard rarely said anything.
(32) a. *∀x Rarely [say(Bill,x)]
b. Rarely [∃x say(Bill,x)]
c. Usually [∀x ¬say(Bill,x)]
(33) a. Usually Bill didn’t say anything.
b. Usually [∀x ¬say(Bill,x)]
c. *∀x Usually [¬say(Bill,x)]
(34) a. Bill mustn’t say anything.
b. Necess [∀x ¬say(Bill,x)]
c. *∀x Necess [¬say(Bill,x)]
(35) a. Bill needn’t say anything.
b. *¬∀x Necess [say(Bill,x)]
c. ∀x ¬Necess [say(Bill,x)]
Lexical decomposition is an unpleasant escape hatch. We justify it here by
saying that as usual, any moves immediately over its licensor (negation), and
no further—just as in (33–35), where the decomposition is overt. Any is not
permitted to land directly over usually or rarely, so it must split rarely.
A more interesting class of examples is provided by any-sentences with
implicatures. Ladusaw (1979) argues that the ∀-account would compute the
wrong implicatures in these cases, as illustrated.
(36) Only ﬂowers in soft ﬂowerbeds get any sleep.
Assertion: All ﬂowers except the ones in soft beds don’t get any sleep.
Presupposition: Flowers in soft beds get some sleep.
Ladusaw’s ∀-prediction: Flowers in soft beds get every amount of sleep.
(37) Tweedledum doesn’t have any rattles anymore.
Assertion: Tweedledum doesn’t have any rattles.
Implicature: Tweedledum had some rattles previously.
Ladusaw’s ∀-prediction: Tweedledum had all rattles previously.
(38) Alice regretted that she had oﬀended anyone.
Assertion: Oﬀending anyone would have struck Alice as regrettable.
Presupposition: She had oﬀended someone.

Ladusaw’s ∀-prediction: She had oﬀended everyone.
(36) would presumably compute its presupposition as in (39): by realizing any
as a wide-scope universal, and then computing the presupposition for each x by
deleting only. (The alternative strategy in (40) deletes only ﬁrst and then realizes any: this gets the same answer after passing through an ungrammatical
intermediate form.)
(39) Only ﬂowers in soft ﬂowerbeds get any sleep.
⇔ ∀(x > 0) Only ﬂowers in soft beds get at least x sleep.
Presupposition: ∀(x > 0) Flowers in soft beds get at least x sleep.
(40) Only ﬂowers in soft ﬂowerbeds get any sleep.
Presupposition: Flowers in soft beds get any sleep.
⇔ ∀(x > 0) Flowers in soft beds get at least x sleep.
While Ladusaw’s demonstration does compute the wrong implicatures
for (36–38), the trouble appears not to lie in the ∀-account. It stems instead
from the notion that implicatures are computed by syntactic transformation
(deletion of only, anymore, and Alice regretted that). A more Gricean computation would proceed as in (41–43), independent of whether any is an existential
or a universal.
(41) Only ﬂowers in soft ﬂowerbeds get any sleep.
Assertion: All ﬂowers except the ones in soft beds don’t get any sleep.
Presupposition (from Quantity maxim): The ﬂowers in soft beds are
diﬀerent. (⇒ they get some sleep)
(42) Tweedledum doesn’t have any rattles anymore.
Assertion: Tweedledum doesn’t have any rattles.
Implicature (conventional): The assertion has not always been true.
(⇒ Tweedledum used to have some rattles)
(43) Alice regretted that she had oﬀended anyone.
Assertion: Oﬀending anyone strikes Alice as regrettable.
Presupposition (from Relevance maxim): Alice regretted something.
(presumably because she oﬀended someone)
This Gricean analysis is not merely an attempt to salvage the ∀-account of
NPI any from the problems of implicature. FC any already requires a similar
story, as shown in (44–45).
(44) Alice enjoyed falling down the rabbit hole.
Assertion: Falling down the rabbit hole is something Alice would enjoy.
Presupposition: Alice fell down the rabbit hole.
(45) Alice enjoys falling down any hole.
Assertion: ∀h Falling down h is something Alice would enjoy.
Incorrect presupposition: ∀h Alice fell down h.
Presupposition (from Relevance): Alice enjoys something.
(presumably because she falls down rabbit holes from time to time)

Indeed, factive constructions provide support for the ∀-account. Consider the famous contrast in (46), which cannot readily be explained in Ladusaw’s (1980) system of upward and downward entailments (Linebarger 1987,
Kadmon & Landman 1993):
(46) a. I’m sorry I said anything.
Assertion: The idea of my saying anything strikes me as bad.
(⇒ the best course would have been to say nothing)
b. # I’m glad I said anything.
Assertion: The idea of my saying anything strikes me as good.
(⇒ any utterance whatsoever would have been a good idea)
The ∀-account makes no semantic distinction between sorry and glad either.
However, with very little fuss, it can ascribe the unacceptability of (46b) to
a pragmatic failure. As shown, it paraphrases (46b) by something much less
likely than the ∃-account’s I’m glad I said something. This yields a pragmatic
rather than a semantic problem; in a a more suitable discourse context, such
as (47), any is perfectly acceptable in the scope of glad.
(47) It did not seem an especially polite remark, but given the great fall he
had just had, she was glad he had said ANYTHING.
No one doubts that FC any and NPI any have something in common, if
only historically. And the old hypothesis that they are really a single universal
quantiﬁer, with some special properties, should not be ruled out just yet. So
far as I can see, an appropriately formulated univocal ∀-account is currently
the simplest way to explain certain syntactic and semantic phenomena—from
the ability of NPI any to exert universal force in (6), to the contrast in (46),
to the broad facts about any’s syntactic distribution.
In the long run there may be no single, complete, elegant account of
any; but however the phenomena are to be teased apart, the traditional NPIFC distinction obscures some useful generalizations.
Footnotes
* Many thanks to Young-Suk Lee, Michael Niv, Mark Steedman, Matthew
Stone, and especially Sabine Iatridou for helpful comments. This work has
been supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship. Any opinions, ﬁndings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this report are those of the author and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
the National Science Foundation.
1. Here and throughout, LFs have been simpliﬁed. Quantiﬁers corresponding
to any appear in boldface.
2. Since (6b) would be ungrammatical without negation, any here is genuinely
the negative-polarity item. The universal quantiﬁcation cannot be explained
by appeal to FC any.
3. A reviewer asks the reasonable question: If this is so, why aren’t state-

ments about Haigha or Santa Claus always ungrammatical? One answer is
that these entities are real in the discourse world that is current at the time
of utterance—which is not the so-called “real world,” but one of the ﬁctional
worlds in which Santa exists. The statement predicates something of Santa in
that world. Other answers are also possible.
4. One might easily question, however, whether the theory correctly predicts
the truth conditions in this case. Does the most sentence really make a separate assertion for each bottle, about the set of children who drank from that
bottle? It seems doubtful. But in other examples, the predicted semantics for
most are more plausible:
(i) Most linguists who have studied any sentencei think iti ’s grammatical.
(ii) Most kids who take any trips to Wonderland forget what it’s like.
∀(n > 0) Mostk [k takes n or more trips][k forgets]
While any can be omitted from (ii), including it strengthens the sentence to
the point of oddity: it makes the surprising claim that return visits don’t make
a kid more likely to remember the place. (Note that the semantics of plural
any-NP, not discussed here due to space limitations, diﬀer slightly from those
of singular any-NP.)
References
Carlson, G. (1980). “Polarity any is Existential.” Linguistic Inquiry 11(4),
799-804.
Kadmon, L., & Landman, F. (1993). “Any.” Linguistics and Philosophy 16,
353–422.
Ladusaw, W. (1979). Polarity Sensitivity as Inherent Scope Relations. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Texas at Austin, reproduced by the IULC,
1980.
Ladusaw, W. (1980). “On the Notion Aﬀective in the Analysis of NegativePolarity Items.” Journal of Linguistic Research 1.
Lasnik, H. (1972). Analyses of Negation in English. Ph.D. dissertation, MIT,
published by Indiana University Linguistics Club, Bloomington, Indiana.
Linebarger, M. (1987). “Negative Polarity and Grammatical Representation.”
Linguistics and Philosophy 10, 325–387.
Progovac, L. (1993). “Negative Polarity: Entailment and Binding.” Linguistics and Philosophy 16, 149–180.
Quine, W. (1960). Word and Object. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

