Indirect STV Election:
A Voting System for South Africa
Jason Eisner
University of Cape Town
Affiliate, ANC Claremont Branch
“Winner take all” electoral systems are not fully representative. Unfortunately, the
ANC’s proposed system of proportional representation is not much better. Because it
ensconces party politics, it is only slightly more representative, and poses a serious threat
to accountability.
Many modern students of democracy favor proportional representation through the
Single Transferable Vote (STV). In countries with high illiteracy, however, this system
may be unworkable.
This paper proposes a practical modification of STV. In the modified system, each
citizen votes for only one candidate. Voters need not specify their second, third, and
fourth choices. Instead, each candidate specifies his or her second, third, and fourth
choices. The modified system is no more difficult for voters than current proposals —
and it provides virtually all the benefits of STV, together with some new ones.

Motivation and Background
Democratic principles and voting systems
Why worry about voting systems at all? How could one system be “more
democratic” than another?
The aim of democracy is simply to carry out the wishes of the people. All citizens
must have equal say in the decisions of their government. This is the principle of
representativity. Its slogan is “one person, one vote; one vote, one value.”
As everyone knows, citizens usually express their wishes indirectly. They elect
delegates to govern on their behalf.
Such an indirect democracy must respect the additional principles of choice and
accountability. The people must be able to choose exactly those delegates who will best
carry out their wishes, and they must have the power to ensure that their delegates act
properly.
Although representativity, choice, and accountability are fundamental to the
democratic ideal, they are not present in all democratic countries.
In particular, a country’s voting system has far-reaching effects on the nature of its
democracy. A voting system can empower the people, or it can leave power in the hands
of an elite. One system may encourage constructive debate, while another may reward
petty politics. The wrong voting system may be responsible for a non-representative or
unaccountable government.
If we want a government that is truly of, by, and for the people, therefore, we must
carefully consider how that government should be elected.
This paper will discuss four voting systems, three of which would not be appropriate
for South Africa. The fourth is a promising new system called Indirect Single
Transferable Vote, or ISTV. This paper will argue that ISTV can meet the demands of
democracy and the demands of efficient government. It does not suffer from the defects

of the other three systems; and it has several features that would promote cooperative,
stable, and effective government.

Majoritarian ward-based system
The most traditional voting system divides a country into precincts along
geographical lines. Each precinct, or ward, elects one delegate of the national assembly.
The delegate is chosen by majority or plurality vote of the ward’s residents.
This ward-based system has a great strength in that it ensures accountability. A ward
can elect anyone it pleases, and can refuse to re-elect a delegate who fails to carry out its
wishes.
Unfortunately, the system also has several serious problems.
First of all, losing votes are never heard. If a two-candidate local election splits the
vote 55% to 45%, then nearly half of the ward’s voters have no representation whatsoever
in the national assembly.
Second, the precincts may be divided, accidentally or deliberately, so as to favor one
group of voters over another. With the right boundary lines in place, a minority party may
gain control of the national assembly. The National Party in South Africa has consistently
engaged in this sort of strategic, anti-democratic redistricting.
Finally, the system encourages an unfortunate form of bipolar party politics. A party
that splits apart, or proposes multiple candidates, is almost certain to lose its majority.
Thus every local election is inevitably fought between only two candidates. To make
things worse, both candidates’ platforms are designed to woo the median voter, who must
be included in any majority.
In the United States, for example, every election is a contest between Democrats and
Republicans for the “moderate” vote. Neither party dares to split, and a vote for a small
third party is a wasted vote.
Is there full political debate in the US Congress? Is there full political debate even
during Congressional elections? Is the minority black vote ever heard? No, on all counts,
because most voters never have the opportunity to elect delegates who represent their
views. The real power lies with those who choose the two candidates. Active party
members and centrist voters have all the influence in this process.
In short, a majoritarian ward-based system may ensure accountability, but only at the
high cost of representativity and choice.

Party-proportional system
To avoid the distortions of a majoritarian system, a voting system needs to achieve
proportional representation. A ward with many views should not be limited to one
delegate. It should elect many delegates, or help to elect many delegates, in such a way
that the national assembly accurately reflects the politics of the national electorate.
The ANC has tentatively endorsed a system where parties (not individuals) are
represented in proportion to their support. A popular party would have the privilege of
filling many seats in the national assembly, and even a small party would be entitled to a
few representatives.
The scheme is meant to ensure that all points of view are heard in the assembly. Any
party with demonstrable support would have a guaranteed place in the public debate.
This is an admirable goal, but the particular system proposed has serious flaws. For
when a democracy prevents its citizens from choosing their representatives as they see fit,

2

and instead limits them to a choice among formally established, monolithic parties, then it
has disempowered them in a very real way.
The lack of choice and accountability is obvious. Suppose you are an ANC
supporter. You want to vote for ANC candidates; but you are not permitted to specify
which ANC candidates best represent your views. Nor can you hold any one ANC
representative to account without voting against the entire ANC slate.
Someone might argue that if you prefer one party candidate to another, you should
make your preference known within the party. But this argument is unconvincing. The
party you support may not ask your opinion: it may not be wholly democratic. Indeed,
you may not even belong to it.1
The only guaranteed recourse you have against a party slate is to vote for a different
party. In practical terms, however, there will never be enough parties to represent all
viewpoints and combinations of viewpoints. You may be dissatisfied with your party, but
not have any other party worth voting for.
Consider the following scenarios:
(1) An NP supporter is disturbed that there are so few women on the NP list. She
wants to favor female candidates in her voting. But she can do so only by
abandoning the NP and casting her ballot for the DP, whose policies she dislikes.
Result: She frowns and votes for the largely male NP slate.
(2) A young, charismatic DP member has attracted attention for his innovative
environmental proposals. Some DP members want him to stand for the national
assembly. Unfortunately, he does not command quite enough votes within his
own party to appear on the DP’s list.
He has the backing of environmentalists in the ANC and the NP, so his total
support in the region would seem to entitle him to a seat. But the constitution
says he must choose one party. He cannot run on a combination of three tickets.
Result: He is not nominated by any party.
(3) A regional ANC delegate accomplishes nothing in the national assembly, because
he spends all his time giving speeches to the larger ANC branches.
Most citizens do not attend branch meetings, cannot name a single thing this
delegate has done for them, and would like to see someone else representing the
region. Yet this man is invariably nominated onto the party list by branch
members.
Theoretically, the voters could express their dissatisfaction by not voting for the
ANC at all — but who else can they vote for?
Result: Accountability is lost: the party protects the unproductive delegate from
the voters. He remains in the assembly for many terms.
(4) An IFP delegate defies her party’s official stand and backs a major piece of ANC
legislation. Many Inkatha supporters are tired of petty obstructionist politics and
support her vote.

1If every citizen belonged to the party he or she voted for, there would be no need for election
campaigns. In fact, there would be no need for elections. The parties could just present their paid-up
membership lists as proof of support!

3

But IFP leaders, who do not want their party to be upstaged by the ANC, are
incensed that she has broken ranks. They refuse to nominate her at the next
election, although she has the support of many voters.
Result: She loses her seat. Other IFP delegates take note and decide not to defy
party leadership in future.
(5) The ANC splits over the issue of unemployment. Half of the ANC would like to
see immediate full employment at any cost, while the other half (supported by
some unions) is afraid that wages would suffer.
The national election is bitter. Each of the new parties paints the other as the
enemy of the working class. Several broad-based ANC politicians, whose
supporters are divided between the parties, can no longer get nominated by either
one.
Result: Many voters become disenchanted with both new parties, and cast their
ballots elsewhere. The ANC loses its parliamentary majority. Furthermore, the
two halves of the ANC now operate separately and find it difficult to work
together.
What do these unfortunate scenarios have in common?
First, they are all entirely plausible, even likely, under the party-proportional system.
Second, they illustrate the lose-lose aspect of the system. To the precise extent that a
party stays together, it fails to offer its voters choice and accountability. Issues may
sometimes arise that can split a party. But a split is costly in both financial and political
terms, and it works against members who straddle the fence.
Third, whenever the party “machine” has different interests from the party’s voters,
its delegates may not even be representative, let alone accountable. This is evident in
scenarios (1), (3), and (4). For example, a political party dominated by men will nominate
male candidates, even if many of its voters would like to elect female candidates. In a
political party with few active or influential members, a delegate need not be responsive
to anyone else but those members. And it is quite possible for party leaders to play
politics against the interests of their supporters.
These objections can be summarized in a complaint: “I don’t want to vote for a
party — I want to vote for a person!” It seems somehow undemocratic to filter the will of
the people through the will of the parties. If the goal of proportional representation is to
ensure that all voices are heard in the national assembly, then why should the voices be
limited to the official compromise positions of a handful of organizations?
Parties in national politics
Are parties really so terrible?
Of course not. There is nothing wrong with parties as such. In fact, there is a great
deal right with parties. They play a vital role in developing policy platforms, persuading
voters, and negotiating within the national assembly.
Parties should and will continue to exist. But for the constitution to treat every party
as a wholly unified, monolithic camp of people — which it is not — and vest enormous
political power in its internal decisions, is for it to deny choice and accountability to its
supporters. In the final analysis, it is simply unfair to the voters.
How about democratic parties? Don’t they provide choice and accountability? Why
on earth shouldn’t their internal decisions have political power?
Fair enough. Some parties may try quite hard to listen to their members.
4

It is true that in its ideal form, the party-proportional system could achieve a high
degree of democracy. Suppose the ANC used proportional representation even when
drawing up its candidate list. ANC feminists would be entitled to put a certain number of
women on the list; ANC environmentalists could add a Green candidate or two; and so
on. This would ensure a balanced and representative slate. Each delegate would be
accountable to the contingents within the party that supported him or her.
If all parties were that democratic and put forth such balanced slates, then the national
assembly would indeed reflect the national political spectrum.
But this vision raises troubling questions. Even assuming that parties can and will be
fully democratic, how about the many party supporters who are not party members? How
about candidates whose support is fragmented among several small parties? And finally,
by what voting system should the party settle on its nominations?
This last question is the telling one. For suppose there is some fair way for a party to
elect individuals to a proportional slate. Then surely the electorate as a whole could use
the same procedure, and directly elect individuals to a proportional parliament.
And if the electorate could, somehow, directly elect its candidates to a proportional
parliament, then all the problems with the party-proportional system would vanish.
In true democratic spirit, citizens who were not active in parties would have an equal
voice, just as illiterate citizens would have an equal voice. There would be no rigid party
boundaries forcing politicians to make rigid choices — to throw in their lot with NP
candidates, Communist candidates, or Zulu candidates, against all others. And finally, the
delegates would be directly accountable to the citizens who voted for them as individuals.

Single Transferable Vote (STV) system
Fortunately, this is possible. There are ways to achieve proportional representation
by voting for individuals. It would be pointless, otherwise, to complain about the partyproportional system.
The celebrated system of Single Transferable Vote (STV) is designed to meet this
goal.
STV tries to represent every viewpoint according to its strength. In this respect it is
just like the party-proportional system.
The difference is that citizens vote for individuals, not parties. That means they can
pick the delegates they like best, and hold those delegates directly accountable.
As in the traditional ward-based system, the country is divided geographically. Each
ward elects not one but several delegates, who represent it proportionally.
The key feature of STV is that the election considers the full preferences of all the
voters. Votes are never disregarded. This empowers the people. A vote cast for a losing
candidate is not ignored, because it is transferred to the voter’s second choice. Similarly,
if a popular candidate wins by a landslide, her extra votes do not go to waste; they are
transferred to her supporters’ second choices.
It takes a complicated system to count ballots under STV. But voting itself is as easy
as 1, 2, 3. A voter simply ranks his or her favorite candidates, like horses — Piet (1),
Thabo (2), John (3), and so on. Then the counting system considers everybody’s
rankings.
An example of STV
A non-numerical example may serve to illustrate the counting system. Suppose a
small ward can elect only three delegates. There are eight candidates running for those
three positions:
5

Thabo
John
Mathombo
Piet
Anna
Donald
Rian
Wimpie

(ANC)
(ANC)
(Inkatha)
(DP)
(NP - progressive)
(NP - centrist)
(NP - conservative)
(CP)

Under STV rules, each candidate in this ward needs one more than ¼ of the total
votes to win. This number of votes is called the quota. Only three candidates can
possibly have a quota at the same time.2
1. Thabo gets more than ¼ of the first-choice votes, so he is elected with votes to
spare.
2. Thabo’s ballots all list John as second choice. So John gets Thabo’s extra votes.
But John does not have a quota yet.
3. No one else has a quota, either. So Piet, the least popular candidate, is
eliminated. Piet’s votes are also transferred to John. John almost has a quota
now — but not quite.
4. Next Donald is eliminated. Some of his votes go to Anna, and some go to Rian
(according to the preferences listed by the voters).
5. Mathombo is eliminated. Some of his votes go to Anna, and some go to John.
6. With Mathombo’s votes, John has passed the quota. Therefore John is elected.
7. John also has a few extra votes. Who gets those extra votes? They can’t go to
Thabo, because Thabo has already won. And they can’t go to Piet or Mathombo,
because those two have already lost. But most of John’s ballots list Anna as their
next choice (4th or 5th choice). So the votes go to Anna.
8. At this point, there is one seat still empty. The remaining candidates are Anna
(1st place), Wimpie (2nd place), Rian (3rd place).
9. Rian, the least popular candidate remaining, is eliminated. Some of his votes go
to Anna, and some of them go to Wimpie.
10. In fact, Anna has now met the quota. Anna gets the third seat (by a slim margin).
So the final result is that Thabo (ANC), John (ANC), and Anna (NP) have been
elected as the three representative delegates.
Who elected them?
Thabo was elected in the ordinary fashion, entirely on first-choice votes. But John
was helped by second-choice votes from the supporters of Thabo, Mathombo, and Piet.
And Anna won only because of a coalition of transferred votes from NP, ANC, and
Inkatha supporters.
It is important that the ANC voters did list Anna as a later choice. Without their
transferred votes, Wimpie could have won the third seat. In other words, there were not

2Just as only one candidate can possibly have more than half the votes (a majority), only three
candidates can have more than a quarter of the votes each.

6

enough ANC supporters to elect a third ANC delegate — but the extra votes from the
ANC did manage to keep the CP candidate out.
How STV secures proportional representation
If the voters happen to fall neatly into parties, and refuse to transfer their votes across
party lines, then STV acts just like a party-proportional system.
Suppose the voters in a certain 8-delegate ward refuse to transfer their votes across
party lines. For example, every NP supporter votes only for NP candidates. Then votes
are transferred only among candidates of the same party.
Each 1/9 of that ward’s total vote, or 11%, earns one of the eight seats. So such an
election might have the following results:
ANC
NP
CP
DP
Other

44%
29%
16%
10%
1%

—>
—>
—>
—>
—>

4 seats exactly
2 seats, plus 7% untransferred votes
1 seat, plus 5% untransferred votes
0 seats, plus 10% untransferred votes
0 seats, plus 1% untransferred votes

Because the untransferred votes did not help anyone win, only 7 seats have been
allocated. The DP is closest to electing an additional candidate, so under the STV rules,
their top candidate will receive the 8th and last seat.
This is one of several reasonable systems for allocating votes proportionally. On
average it gives a slight advantage to large parties. But that is not an adequate reason to
reject it. Mathematicians have proved that no proportional system can satisfy all the usual
criteria of fairness. In fact, all the voting systems discussed in this essay happen to favor
large parties.
0–10%
11–21%
22–32%
33–43%
44–55%
56–66%
67–77%
78–88%
89–100%

no seats
1 seat
2 seats
3 seats
4 seats
5 seats
6 seats
7 seats
8 seats

no representation
13% representation
25% representation
38% representation
50% representation
62% representation
75% representation
87% representation
100% representation

In practice, of course, there often will be inter-party transfers. This is a good thing
for the voters and for their parties. Once a voter has ranked all the candidates from his
party, he or she is wise to list candidates from other parties.
In the example above, 23% of all ballots did not help elect any candidate. Those 23%
of voters could have had more influence if they had so chosen. For example, if the CP
voters had all listed NP candidates at the bottom of their ballots, as 4th, 5th and 6th
choices, their extra 5% would have given the NP control of the eighth seat. Presumably,
the CP would have preferred this to the actual outcome, in which the seat went to the DP.
In summary, if there are no inter-party transfers, then STV allocates seats like a
party-proportional system. Each party’s seats are filled exactly as if the party had held a
primary election using STV.
But if there are inter-party transfers, then STV allows voters to elect compromise
candidates to contested seats. In this sense, STV is more proportional than the partyproportional system.

7

Is STV practical?
It should be obvious, by now, that STV is highly democratic.
More than any other major voting system, the STV system of ranked choices allows
all citizens an equal voice in the government. And because every voter’s ballot helps to
elect a particular delegate, the elected delegates are accountable to their supporters.
STV does not even permit parties to be undemocratic. Several candidates from the
same party can run against each other without fear of splitting the vote. This means that
STV lets voters choose their parties’ candidates at the same time as they choose their
parties.
In other words, STV combines democratic primary elections with democratic general
elections — all on a single ballot, and all at no expense to the parties.
It is for these reasons that so many students of electoral systems have supported STV.
Their confidence has been borne out by experience. The system has been used with great
success in the legislative elections of Ireland, Northern Ireland, Australia, and Malta,
among other places. STV-elected governments have been marked by stability,
compromise, and attention to voters.3
Apparently, the complex counting procedure has not troubled voters in these
countries. Voters have the assurance of their parties that the system is fair. And as for the
voting process itself, it is easy enough to mark first, second, and third choices on a ballot.
Very few ballots in these elections are invalid.
Many people, including high-placed ANC members, agree that STV would be an
excellent system for South Africa. Their only formal objection has been a practical one.
About two-thirds of South African citizens are illiterate. They might have difficulty
filling out the ballots.
The objection carries some weight. In more traditional systems, the voter need only
mark the name of his preferred party or candidate. An election official can help him to do
this. But under STV, the same voter has to find the names of several candidates on the
ballot. Then he has to write numerals next to them in his order of preference. Even with
a lot of help from an election official, this might be too confusing for a voter who cannot
read and study the list of names.
Happily for all, there is a solution to this practical problem. The rest of this paper
describes a new, modified version of STV — a version that overcomes the literacy
objection.

The Indirect STV System
In the new election process, the voter only has to choose one candidate. Any unused
votes will automatically be transferred to a second-choice candidate — exactly as in
standard STV.
But the voter does not have to name a second choice. Instead, the first-choice
candidate decides how his or her extra votes will be used.
In our sample election, John himself might have the following ranked preferences:

3See Vernon Bogdanor, What Is Proportional Representation? A Guide to the Issues (Oxford: Martin
Robertson, 1984).

8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

John
Thabo
Piet
Mathombo
Anna
Donald
Rian
Wimpie

(ANC)
(ANC)
(DP)
(Inkatha)
(NP - progressive)
(NP - centrist)
(NP - conservative)
(CP)

John publicly commits himself to this list before the election. A vote for John, in the
new system, is a vote for the whole ranked list.
In other words, anyone who casts a ballot for John is automatically voting for Thabo
as second choice, Piet as third choice, and so on. Everything else works exactly like
standard STV.

Party slates
In effect, what happens is that the citizens vote for their favourite candidates, and the
candidates vote for each other. Political scientists would call this an indirect election. So
we can call the new system “Indirect STV,” or ISTV.
There is a useful twist to the system. Voters may cast ballots for non-candidates. For
example, you could vote for a party. Perhaps the ANC has officially endorsed the
following list in your ward:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Thabo
John
Piet
Anna
Donald
Mathombo
Rian
Wimpie

(ANC)
(ANC)
(DP)
(NP - progressive)
(NP - centrist)
(Inkatha)
(NP - conservative)
(CP)

Then instead of voting for John or Thabo, you could cast your vote for the official ANC
list. As delegates were elected or eliminated, your vote would be transferred from
candidate to candidate down the list, courtesy of the ANC.
If most citizens cast their votes for parties, ISTV is nothing but a refined ward-based
version of the party-proportional system. On the other hand, if voters are dissatisfied with
the party lists, they can take the initiative to choose their representatives directly.
In this way, parties still play a constructive and powerful role in nominating
candidates. But accountability is preserved: the people retain the power to vote for the
candidates they like best.

Split slates
Under ISTV, voters have slightly less control than they did under STV. For instance,
it is impossible to vote for John as first choice without also supporting Thabo and Piet.
Each voter must choose an entire ticket to support.
A knowledgeable voter will therefore consider the entire ticket when voting. Under
certain conditions, some candidates may want to split their tickets.

9

Perhaps Donald, the centrist NP candidate, is uncertain who should be his official
second choice. If he picks Anna, he may alienate his more conservative supporters, who
will vote for Rian instead. On the other hand, if he picks Rian, his more progressive
supporters will go off and vote for Anna.
Donald guesses that about half his supporters would prefer Rian as second choice,
and the other half would prefer Anna as second choice. So he promises to divide their
votes accordingly.
It is important that Donald be allowed to divide votes in this way. If he backs only
one of the other NP candidates, he will not be representing his supporters fully. By
splitting his slate, he allows people to vote for him and for the NP in general, without
making them throw too much weight behind either of the more extreme NP candidates.
The technical details are not too complicated. Donald’s official slate looks like this:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Donald
Anna (50%), Rian (50%)
Mathombo
Wimpie (70%), Piet (30%)
John
Thabo

If Donald receives extra votes from the public, his second choice will be split 50-50.
He will transfer half of his extra ballots to Anna, and half to Rian.
Suppose Rian is subsequently eliminated. Then all Rian’s ballots have to be
redistributed. Any ballots Rian got from Donald should be divided evenly between
Donald’s third choices, who are (again) Anna and Rian. But Rian can no longer use the
votes. So the ballots are all transferred to Anna.
If Donald’s fifth-place votes come into play, then they are split between Wimpie and
Piet. This time the split is uneven. 70% of the transferred ballots go to Wimpie first; the
other 30% go to Piet first. (In effect, 70% of Donald’s ballots rank Wimpie fifth and Piet
sixth; the rest list them the other way around.)
Three or more candidates could be co-ranked in the same way.

The election procedure
The details of an ISTV election would be quite straightforward. The election would
run something like this:
1. Potential candidates collect signatures from local voters. A candidate needs some
minimum number of signatures in order to run for office.
2. The candidates declare their intent to run. (They submit their signature lists to
election authorities by some deadline.)
3. The candidates campaign for support over a period of a few months.
4. Political parties name their recommended lists of candidates, if any, in each ward.
5. The collegiate election: The candidates vote for each other, using STV rankings.
They may split the rankings. No votes are counted, but the ballots are made
public.

10

6. The general election (about two weeks later): The public votes by secret ballot.
Each citizen is entitled to vote for one candidate or party.
7. The independent election commission counts the votes using STV. A vote for
any elector is a vote for that elector’s STV ballot.
8. The results are announced.
The only novel element is the collegiate election (step 5) — which voters are free to
ignore.
Illiteracy is still a problem under this system: it is always tricky to vote without
reading. But ISTV makes voting much easier than STV does. The instructions are
simple: “Mark your favourite candidate. If you have no favourite candidate, mark your
favourite party.”
Those instructions can be easily explained to any voter. An illiterate voter may have
trouble finding the right box to mark. But an election official can provide assistance.
Is it too “difficult” for voters to choose individuals?
The truth is that any democracy must ask voters to choose individuals at some point.
That fact is not unique to ISTV — nor should it be.
In a traditional ward-based system, citizens must vote for individuals. In a
democratic party-proportional system, party members must elect individuals onto the
party list. So ISTV is not more demanding than these other systems.
One might wonder about the simplicity of the ballot. South Africans often mention
Namibia’s first general election, in which voters only had to choose among party symbols.
Careful ballot design would also help South Africa’s illiterate voters. A small party
symbol might be printed next to each name. The parties themselves would be listed at the
top of the ballot, in large type, beside large or repeated party symbols.
Photographs next to the names could be helpful as well. After all, ISTV candidates
are local candidates who have campaigned locally. Voters will often know what they look
like.
In some imaginary ward, an ISTV English-language ballot might look something like
this (party symbols and photographs are not shown in this figure):

11

ANC
AZAPO
CP
DP
LP
IFP
NP
PAC
SACP

African National Congress
Azanian People’s Organization
Conservative Party
Democratic Party
Labour Party4
Inkatha Freedom Party
National Party
Pan-Africanist Congress
South African Communist Party

Bezuidenhout, Evita
Biko, Steven
First, Ruth
Gandhi, Mohandas
Kadalie, Clemens
Lourens, Oom Schalk

Luthuli, Albert
Moroka, James
Smuts, Jan Christiaan
Sobukwe, Robert
Verwoerd, Hendrik
Zulu, Shaka

Asking voters to mark a single box on such a ballot is quite reasonable — and they
will welcome the increased choice. Of course, the exact form of the ballot is open to
debate. The final decisions are up to the election commission.
Note that a party-proportional ballot would not be much shorter than this one. South
Africa has nine or ten major parties at present — all of which would be on the ballot.
Some illiterate voters would need help just to choose among the parties.
Moreover, under a party-proportional system, parties would be likely to split apart.
So the party-proportional ballot would only become longer with time.
An ISTV system, by contrast, helps keep parties together. Under ISTV, a party can
tolerate internal disagreements without splitting — and still offer choices to its supporters.

Some Criticisms of Indirect STV
Do coalitions break down?
Some students of politics distrust proportional representation. They point out that in
most countries using proportional representation, no party ever wins a majority. Then the
country must be governed by a coalition of parties.
They go on to say that coalitions are a bad way to govern. Parties enter into
coalitions without the consent of the voters. The parties have trouble cooperating with
each other. And small parties have too much power, because they can threaten to
withdraw from the coalition and dissolve the government.

4Although the LP has no candidates in this ward, one can still vote for the LP party slate. The
candidates on that slate belong to other parties; however, the LP has decided to support them.

12

These critics claim that in the interest of stability, it is better to have a unitary
government than a coalition government. Some single party should be chosen to lead the
country — even if that party does not have a majority.
This is an argument against all forms of proportional representation. Partyproportional, STV, and ISTV systems would all lead to government by coalition some of
the time.
However, ISTV is likely to yield the most stable coalitions. A key feature of ISTV is
that delegates rely on each other’s support to get seats. A party will win more seats if it
has the support of another party that is ideologically close to it.
For this reason, coalition partners have a strong incentive to work together. If one
party refuses to cooperate, the other party will refuse to help it get elected next time. This
threat has teeth. A party that does not cooperate with its coalition partners will lose
representation, and some of its delegates will lose their jobs.
In fact, individual delegates are accountable for their failure to cooperate. If two
parties are formally in coalition, and a delegate of one party refuses to compromise, the
MPs of the other party will stop helping him or her get elected.
So if a small party is in coalition with a large and popular party, the small party’s
delegates have ample incentive to be good partners: they depend on the large party’s
support. This contrasts with the party-proportional system, where a small party can bring
down the government with impunity.
ISTV even gives voters some control over which coalitions are formed. Parties
indicate in advance whom they might cooperate with — a party’s potential allies are
ranked on its ballot. Voters are free to reject a party on that basis.
It should be added that because ISTV encourages parties to stay together, parties will
be bigger than under other proportional systems. Hence coalition governments may be
less common in the first place. In Ireland, for example, the number of parties decreased
gradually from nineteen to three after STV was adopted. Single-party government has
been the rule there rather than the exception.
So the coalition “problem” is not a reason to reject ISTV. Indeed, coalitions should
be both less common and more effective under ISTV than under the party-proportional
system.

Would parties be strong enough?
A more serious criticism of ISTV is that it might weaken parties. A strong party can
be an effective instrument of social change.
To be strong, a party must stand together and vote together. The problem with ISTV
is that it lets party members compete with each other for seats. Under ISTV, dissent
would be aired in public. And the parties would have less control over their candidates.
Participation and accountability
The first answer to this criticism is that it is anti-democratic. The whole point of a
democratic system is to accommodate dissent. Dissenting views should be aired in
public. The people should be allowed to choose among them.
Furthermore, accountability is part of democracy. South African liberation groups
have always stressed that elected officials must be accountable to the people. But when
parties order their delegates to vote one way or another, the delegates are no longer fully
accountable to the people. They are accountable to party leaders instead.

13

Party unity
Part of the criticism stands, however. The people may want strong parties, parties
that have some control over their delegates. Parties are like unions. Even if a party has
internal disagreements, and even if those disagreements are public, there are still times
when the party must compromise and act as a unit. Voters might be willing to sacrifice
some choice in order to achieve better unity.
Obviously, party-proportional elections give parties plenty of control. If a party wins
sixty seats in the national assembly, it is up to the party structure to fill those seats.
Delegates who defy their parties on important issues are risking their jobs.
STV, by contrast, does not give parties much control at all. Delegates under STV are
accountable to their constituents, not their parties. STV elections are contests among
individual politicians. Of course, delegates of one party may still decide to work together
against other parties. But party leaders cannot easily discipline delegates who are out of
line. The best they can do is threaten to withhold campaign funds.
So one system achieves unity at the expense of democracy; the other, democracy at
the expense of unity.
Indirect STV is an excellent compromise. The ISTV mechanism — unlike STV —
provides for party slates. So the party structure still has some influence. Many voters
with no particular preference among candidates will simply vote for their party’s
recommended slate. This gives parties a measure of control over their delegates.
Indeed, voters who want centrally led, unified parties can deliberately vote for the
party slate rather than for any individual. This way, they increase the influence that party
leadership has over party members. If voters are dissatisfied with party leadership,
however, they can vote for the particular individuals they prefer, thereby electing them
and boosting their independence. Thus both party leaders and elected delegates are held
accountable.
Debate
It may be too pessimistic to say that dissent will weaken parties. Ironically, ISTV
may actually help parties strengthen their platforms.
ISTV specifically encourages constructive debate within parties. To win a seat, a
politician needs the backing of other candidates from his or her party. So the best way to
get elected is to convince many other candidates that you have thought about the issues,
that your views are correct, and that you can come up with useful new ideas.
Popularity among the masses is not always enough under ISTV. You also need the
votes of other popular candidates. To get those votes, you have to prove yourself to the
other candidates: prove that your heart is in the right place and your ideas are better than
the next person’s. Demagoguery will not accomplish this — only substantive debate.
And substantive debate among candidates could make party platforms stronger, more
coherent, and more unified than ever.
The bottom line is that there are two kinds of disagreement. Candidates may disagree
about goals and priorities — in which case voters should be permitted to choose among
them. Or they may simply disagree about the best way to achieve shared goals — in
which case some of them are right and some are wrong.
ISTV allows voters to choose in the first kind of disagreement, and encourages
candidates to convince each other in the second kind. In this way, it achieves the best of
both worlds.

14

Bribery, patronage, and back-room deals
It can be argued that ISTV has the potential for corruption. One candidate could be
bribed to list another as second choice.
But the truth of the matter is that all politics has the potential for corruption. A vote
implies trust. If you vote for a candidate who is willing to betray your interests in return
for a bribe, then he will eventually sell you out anyway: if not during the electoral process,
then during his term of office.
In any case, candidates’ second choices are public knowledge before the election. If
Treurnicht listed Mandela as second choice (or vice-versa), he would not get many votes.
Among honest candidates, the payoffs for support are far more benign. Suppose
Molofe is a very popular candidate who is certain to win. Akers is trying to become her
second choice. For Akers to succeed, and gain Molofe’s surplus, he must lay out his
program and convince Molofe that he is worthy of support — that he will vote in close
accordance with Molofe’s own principles.
So the “price” of Molofe’s support is a guarantee that Akers will usually vote with
her. Such a guarantee is entirely in keeping with proportional representation. After all,
Akers will be elected with the help of Molofe supporters, and it is appropriate that his
actions reflect their views. If Molofe is elected with 150% of the quota, and the extra
50% helps to elect a grateful Akers, then Molofe’s supporters get a kind of extra halfdelegate by virtue of Akers’ cooperation.
Similarly, suppose Naidoo is a fiscal conservative who will draw some votes, but
who is unlikely to be elected. She lists Henman as her second choice. She is eliminated,
but with the help of her votes, Henman is elected. In return he gives her a job high up in a
government agency.
Thus, although Naidoo does not have enough votes to become an MP, her support
does earn her an influential position in the next tier of government. This is a democratic
form of patronage. It expands proportional representation into appointed government. It
is far preferable to the usual system of “your friends out, my friends in.”

Summary
In conclusion, ISTV seems to be a superior electoral system on virtually all measures.
The following chart summarizes the four systems discussed in this paper.

15

Representativity
Voter choice
Delegate accountability
Ease of voting
Role of parties
Stability of parties
Party accountability
Stability of coalitions
Quality of debate
Democratic patronage
Influence of ordinary
voters (outside parties)
Usual size of ward
Geographical
representation5

Ward-based
majoritarianism
Low
Low
Medium
High
High
High
Low
N/A
Low
Low

Partyproportional
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium
High
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Low

STV

Indirect STV

Very High
Very High
High
Low
Low
High
N/A
Medium
Medium
Medium

High
High
High
Medium
Medium
High
High
High
High
High

Low

Low

High

High

1 delegate
Only for
majority party

Large region

5 delegates

5–10 delegates

Possible

Yes

Yes

ISTV is highly democratic. It gives the people a wide range of choices; thanks to the
system of transferred votes, it represents viewpoints proportionally; and it holds both
delegates and parties accountable to their supporters.
ISTV also promotes constructive government. It encourages similar candidates, and
similar parties, to work together and discuss issues of mutual concern. It does not require
them to fight each other unmercifully for votes.
Finally, ISTV avoids the pitfalls of standard STV. It provides a clear role and
mission for parties; and it does not make voting unnecessarily complicated.
ISTV should be acceptable to everyone in South Africa — big parties, small parties,
and cross-party movements; fighters for democracy; voters who are active in politics and
voters who are not; illiterate voters; even voters whose first-choice candidates lose.
If we want the new South Africa to be a thoroughly democratic and effectively
governed country, ISTV deserves the most serious consideration.

5For

16

example, are CP voters in Cape Town represented? How about DP voters in Bloemfontein?

