Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Memory and Language
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jml

Predictability effects on durations of content and function words
in conversational English
Alan Bell a,b,*, Jason M. Brenier c, Michelle Gregory d, Cynthia Girand e, Dan Jurafsky f
a

Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado, Box 295, 290 Hellems, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
Cataphora, Inc., Redwood City, CA, USA
d
Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA
e
Silver Creek Systems, Westminster, CO, USA
f
Department of Linguistics, Stanford University, USA
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 8 March 2007
Revision received 1 June 2008
Available online 10 September 2008
Keywords:
Word frequency
Predictability
Content words
Function words
Word duration
Models of speech production

a b s t r a c t
In a regression study of conversational speech, we show that frequency, contextual predictability, and repetition have separate contributions to word duration, despite their substantial correlations. We also found that content- and function-word durations are affected
differently by their frequency and predictability. Content words are shorter when more frequent, and shorter when repeated, while function words are not so affected. Function
words have shorter pronunciations, after controlling for frequency and predictability.
While both content and function words are strongly affected by predictability from the
word following them, sensitivity to predictability from the preceding word is largely limited to very frequent function words. The results support the view that content and function words are accessed differently in production. We suggest a lexical-access-based model
of our results, in which frequency or repetition leads to shorter or longer word durations by
causing faster or slower lexical access, mediated by a general mechanism that coordinates
the pace of higher-level planning and the execution of the articulatory plan.
Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Two factors have long been assumed to play a crucial
role in the way that words are produced and comprehended. One is a word’s frequency or predictability. Another is the lexical category distinction between function
words (closed-class words that play a grammatical role)
and content words (open-class, semantically richer words).
These two factors are intimately related, most obviously
because function words are much more frequent and predictable than content words. This relation makes it difﬁcult
to know whether to attribute any particular effect in lexical production to words’ frequency or predictability or to

* Corresponding author. Address: Department of Linguistics, University
of Colorado, Box 295, 290 Hellems, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. Fax: +1 303
492 4416.
E-mail address: alan.bell@colorado.edu (A. Bell).
0749-596X/$ - see front matter Ó 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jml.2008.06.003

their lexical class. We propose to examine the two factors
together, by analyzing how they affect the pronounced
duration of words in natural conversational speech. The
differences in the effects of frequency and predictability
on content and function words, among other results, have
consequences for how models of speech production treat
these two factors.
The effects of frequency and predictability on lexical
production are systematic, wide ranging, and have been
long observed. The reduced articulation of frequent words
was pointed out by the Arab grammarians of the 12th century (Leslau, 1969) and was well known by early modern
linguists (Jespersen, 1924/1965; Schuchardt, 1885; Zipf,
1929; inter alia). In connected speech, frequent words have
shorter durations and a variety of other lenited characteristics such as reduced vowels, deleted codas, more tapping
and palatalization, and reduced pitch range (Aylett & Turk,
2006; Bybee, 2000; Fidelholz, 1975; Fosler-Lussier &

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

Morgan, 1999; Hooper, 1976; Munson, 2007; Pluymaekers,
Ernestus, & Baayen, 2005b; Rhodes, 1992; Rhodes, 1996,
among others). For elicited speech in tasks such as picture
naming, more frequent words have a shorter latency from
picture display to the onset of the word, although no effects on duration have been found (Damian, 2003; Grifﬁn
& Bock, 1998; Oldﬁeld & Wingﬁeld, 1965; and references
they cite). Shorter and more reduced responses for more
frequent words have been found, in addition to shorter
latencies in word-reading studies (Kello & Plaut, 2000;
Munson, 2007; and references they cite); Balota, Boland,
and Shields (1989) found shorter durations for words preceded by related primes. More predictable words are also
shorter and more reduced. This holds whatever predictability measure is used: from surrounding words in the
sentence (Lieberman, 1963); cloze probability (Grifﬁn &
Bock, 1998; Liu, Bates, Powell, & Wulfeck, 1997); or the joint
probability, conditional probability, or mutual information
of a word with the previous or following words (Aylett &
Turk, 2004; Bybee & Scheibman, 1999; Gregory, Raymond,
Bell, Fosler-Lussier, & Jurafsky, 1999; Jurafsky, Bell, Gregory,
& Raymond, 2001; Krug, 1998; Pluymaekers, Ernestus, &
Baayen, 2005a). Longer-distance measures of the predictability of a word also affect surface form. For example, a
new word/referent is less predictable when it occurs in a future sentence than an old or previously mentioned referent.
Indeed, English content words that have occurred in the
previous context are shortened and/or less intelligible
(Bard, Anderson, Sotillo, Aylett, Doherty-Sneddon, & Newlands, 2000; Fowler, 1988; Fowler & Housum, 1987; Hawkins & Warren, 1994). Gahl and Garnsey (2004) showed
grammatical effects of longer-distance predictability: in
sentences with verbs that were strongly biased toward a
particular syntactic subcategorization, the verbs and their
arguments were both shorter when the subcategorization
of the sentence matched the verb bias.
Less is known about differences in how content and
function words are produced. The widely held presumption that they are produced differently rests mainly on evidence that they participate in different kinds of speech
errors. As pointed out by Garrett (1975, 1980), word exchanges (as in the exchange of trees and rain in ‘‘Well,
you can cut rain in the trees”) are very largely limited to
content words. Function words, however, are common in
shifts, a positional misplacement of a word (as in the shift
of out from ‘‘ﬁgure out” in ‘‘If you can’t ﬁgure what that out
is”). In addition, Garrett pointed out that sound exchanges
(as the exchange of t and n in ‘‘pons and pats” for ‘‘pots and
pans”, and of t and j in ‘‘Jom and Terry” for ‘‘Tom and
Jerry”) are overwhelmingly restricted to content words.
Processing of function words is impaired but content
words are largely spared in agrammatic (Broca’s) aphasia,
whereas the inability to process content words is characteristic of ﬂuent (Wernicke’s) aphasics (Caramazza & Berndt, 1985; Goodglass & Menn, 1985). Such differences
motivated Garrett’s proposal that function words have a
privileged mode of access in speech production that is distinct from content words, an important issue that remains
controversial.
There are also suggestions that there may be differences
in the effects of frequency and predictability in the pro-

93

cessing of content and function words, although only from
studies of comprehension. Segalowitz and Lane (2000),
examining word naming in sentence contexts, found a
strong frequency effect for content words, possibly diminished for more frequent words. But there was a much
weaker or no effect of frequency for function words, except
possibly for the most infrequent ones. Segalowitz and Lane
(2000) also found that function words were in general accessed faster than content words. This difference between
content and function words was completely accounted for,
however, by the frequency and cloze predictability of the
target word being named. Herron and Bates (1997) found
that contextual information facilitated recognition latencies for function words more than for content words. So
frequency and predictability may affect access times of
content and function words differently in comprehension,
but some of the differences may be due to the different frequency and predictability proﬁle of content and function
words.
Thus despite this early experimental attention, important questions remain about how frequency and predictability, lexical class, and the relationship between them
affect pronounced forms. In order to incorporate these factors into models of speech production, we need to know
more about three key questions: (1) What are the effects
of frequency, predictability, and repetition on word forms
in speech production? (2) Do these effects differ for content and function words, and are there differences in how
much reduction content and function words undergo, after
controlling for predictability, frequency, and related factors? (3) What implications do such effects of lexical class,
frequency, predictability, and repetition have for production models?
We begin with question (1) on the effects of frequency,
predictability, and repetition. The work described above
has uncovered pervasive effects of reduction in frequent,
predictable, and repeated words. Yet we still know very little about the relationship between these variables.
First, we know little about the relation between frequency and predictability. We do not even know whether
there is a reduction effect of word frequency after controlling for word predictability, since previous work on predictability has not addressed crucial comparisons: Bell
et al. (2003) investigated the effect of predictability on
duration and reduction but not the effect of frequency.
Pluymaekers et al. (2005a) used the predictability measure
of mutual information, which confounds frequency and
predictability. Aylett and Turk (2004) used word frequency
and predictability from preceding words but did not report
their individual effects for prosodically controlled data.
Similarly, we know little about differences in the effects
of frequency and predictability, both lexically and across
the range of frequency and predictability. Grifﬁn and Bock
(1998), using picture naming in a sentential context, found
that frequent words tended to be named faster, but not
when they were highly constrained by context. The results
of Gordon and Caramazza (1982) and Segalowitz and Lane
(2000) suggest that, in comprehension at least, frequency
effects may not be as strong for high-frequency words. Furthermore, there seem to be differences in the lexical generality of predictability effects. Some words were only

94

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

affected by predictability from preceding contexts, and
others only by predictability from following contexts, in
the studies of 10 English function words (Bell et al.,
2003) and of seven Dutch adjective/adverbs (Pluymaekers
et al., 2005a).
Second, while we have known since the classic studies
of Fowler and Housum (1987) and Fowler (1988) that a repeated word is (sometimes) reduced when compared with
the ﬁrst mention, we know very little about how this
reduction is related to predictability and other variables.
It is not clear whether the repetition effect holds after controlling for prosodic variables; previous studies attempting
to answer this question have produced mixed results.
Hawkins and Warren (1994), using words from conversations elicited by the use of objects and pictures, concluded
that second-mention reduction could be accounted for by
accent differences. Bard and Aylett (1999), however, did
ﬁnd both an accent effect and a repetition effect in maptask conversations, whereas Aylett and Turk (2004) found
no repetition effect in addition to prosody effects, using
the same sort of materials. Pluymaekers et al. (2005a)
found shorter sufﬁx durations of second and subsequent
mentions for seven Dutch adjective/adverbs, after controlling for accent. Only the latter two studies have addressed
the correlation of repeated words and their predictability.
We also do not know whether the repetition effect is a binary one (given versus new), or whether it is scalar, with larger reductions for more repetitions. While some earlier
studies such as Pluymaekers et al. (2005a) found an effect
for the (log of) the number of prior mentions on duration,
neither they nor earlier studies such as Gregory et al.
(1999) and Aylett and Turk (2004) tested explicitly
whether third and subsequent mentions contributed to it.
As for question (2), the systematic study of the relationship between lexical class and predictability variables in
speech production has just begun. Frequency and repetition are known to affect reduction in content words, but
their effect on function-word reduction is not known. Conversely, no study has considered whether function words
undergo reduction effects more than content words, once
prosody, frequency, and predictability are controlled. No
studies have investigated whether word predictability affects content and function words identically. A similar situation exists for the reduction of repeated words. Studies
of the effect have been mostly restricted to words used
in referring expressions, mostly nouns, on the assumption
that repetition reduction would parallel other processes
that provide for the backgrounding of old information in
discourse. The results of Pluymaekers et al. (2005a) for seven Dutch adjective/adverbs suggest that repetition reduction is not limited to words in referring phrases. But we
still do not know whether verbs or adjectives in general
would show a repetition effect, or what we would see with
function words.
Once some basic empirical relations among frequency,
predictability, lexical class, and reduction are established,
we can address their implications for current models of
speech production. There are two main issues here. The
ﬁrst is the role of lexical class: are content and function
words accessed by the same mechanisms or by different
ones? The second issue concerns the potential mechanisms

or sources for the inﬂuence of words’ predictability and
frequency on their articulatory realizations. Unsurprisingly, the two issues are related.
The early and inﬂuential Garrett (1975), Garrett (1980)
model proposed that content and function words have different modes of access. Function words are prespeciﬁed in
syntactic templates. The syntactic templates are selected
with forms of function words ﬁlled in, and content words
are accessed at a later stage, ﬁlling lexical slots in the templates. As a consequence, content words, but not function
words, could be subject to phonological exchanges, like
the ‘‘pons and pats” example cited earlier, in accord with
the observed absence of such errors in function words. This
strong distinction has been challenged by Dell (1990). He
concluded, from experiments with elicited speech errors,
that both content and function words are subject to phonological errors. Such errors rarely occur in function words in
naturalistic collections, however, because high-frequency
words are generally less vulnerable to speech errors. The
Extended Garrett Model of Lapointe and Dell (1989) maintains the differential access of content and function words
in a weaker form. In their model, function words belong to
syntactic fragments and are accessed via a feature-lookup
procedure. Content words are accessed via network activation, ﬁlling slots in syntactic phrase structures. Evidence
for these different mechanisms comes from observations
of numerous characteristics of speech errors and from substitution patterns of function words in agrammatic aphasics. Consequently, at the level of lemma selection,
content words are distinguished from function words.
But at the level of phonological encoding, as segment sequences are speciﬁed, the two are no longer distinct, and
thus have the potential of undergoing sound errors in the
same way. Even this weaker distinction was rejected by
Stemberger (1985), who proposed that content and function words are accessed in the same way, and that the
speech error and aphasic patterns can be explained by differences in the function, form, frequency, and predictability of content and function words. It is plausible that
differences in the frequency and predictability effects for
content and function words would be relevant to this controversy. Indeed, we will argue that certain differences in
these effects do support some degree of differential access.
The general issue of whether observed differences between content and function words are due to an intrinsic
difference or to differences in their form and function has
long vexed studies of the role of lexical class in speech processing. Stemberger’s argument and Segalowitz and Lane’s
(2000) ﬁnding mentioned earlier that the faster access of
function words in comprehension could be accounted for
by their frequency and predictability are just two examples. Function words, in addition to marking syntactic
and discourse structures, are more frequent, more predictable, have shorter phonological forms, are less likely to be
prosodically prominent, and exhibit more idiosyncratic
form variation than content words. See Goodglass and
Menn (1985), Bock (1989), and Herron and Bates (1997)
for further useful comments on this problem.
In examining mechanisms for probabilistic reduction,
we adopt the widely accepted framework for models of
speech production that comprises stages for conceptual

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

and syntactic planning, lexical selection, phonological
encoding and the construction of a prosodic frame, retrieval of articulatory routines, and articulatory execution.
(Bock & Levelt, 1994; Browman & Goldstein, 1990; Dell &
O’Seaghdha, 1992; Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999; Shattuck-Hufnagel, 1992; Wheeldon & Lahiri, 1997, among
others). Within this framework three main classes of potential mechanisms or sources for the inﬂuence of words’
predictability and frequency on their articulatory realizations have been proposed: the direct inﬂuence of frequency
and
predictability
on
articulation,
the
representation of word sequences at various stages, and
lexical access.
Among direct-inﬂuence mechanisms, the automatization of articulatory sequences through repetition (Bybee
& Hopper, 2001) is perhaps the simplest. Although it has
plausible support from studies of highly practiced motor
skills, it does not easily account for the range of effects of
contextual predictability. Pluymaekers et al. (2005a) propose a second model, drawing from Van Son, Koopmansvan Beinum, and Pols (1998) and Aylett and Turk (2004),
in which the articulatory mechanism takes account of the
frequency and predictability of words continuously, so that
more redundant (less informative) parts of the speech
stream are realized with less articulatory effort. A third
possibility, the exemplar model of Pierrehumbert (2002),
is more speciﬁc about the link from word to articulatory
form. She proposes that a word’s phonological encoding
activates a region in the phonetic exemplar space, so that
frequency effects would be directly represented by the distribution of a word’s exemplars. Her model also includes a
biasing mechanism for speaker, situation, and word effects
that could be readily extended to accommodate contextual-predictability effects.
The representation of predictable word sequences is a
second candidate that could mediate the connection between frequency/predictability and articulatory form.
Some predictable word sequences may be lexicalized or
may be associated with routinized articulatory plans, leading to probabilistic reduction (Bush, 2001; MacWhinney,
2001). The fact that such multi-word representations are
presumably limited to very frequent and/or very predictable word sequences leads one to expect stronger effects
in the higher ranges of frequency/predictability, and a
stronger effect of joint than of conditional probability.
Grouping at the level of phonological encoding is another
possibility that has not been considered. Predictable sequences may be more likely to be encoded within prosodic
phrases and words rather than across them. If so, the positional effects on duration of prosodic phrasing would bias
them toward greater reduction.
The third mechanism, lexical access, is a prime candidate for the source of frequency effects on form reduction,
because of its known sensitivity to word frequency. Pierrehumbert (2002) and Levelt (2002), among others, have
suggested a connection between the two, despite the fact
that many lexical-access studies have found latency effects
of frequency without concomitant duration effects (e.g.
Damian, 2003).
But how would a higher level of activation of lexical
forms, and thus faster access, lead to shorter pronuncia-

95

tions? This third mechanism would require some sort of
feed-forward link from lexical access. The idea of such a
link has been suggested by Pierrehumbert (2002) in the
form of a parameter of ‘‘ease of retrieval” in phonological
encoding and by Munson (2007) in relation to the longer
and fuller articulation of disﬂuencies. One possibility
drawing on these ideas is that short-term coordination between the access of words and their articulation may increase the strength and/or duration of articulation when
the progress of phonological encoding is slowed, but not
so impaired to trigger overt disﬂuencies. While a detailed
examination of any such mechanisms is beyond the scope
of this paper and must be the subject of future work, initial
evidence that such a lexical-access mechanism is involved
would be to establish that a word’s frequency affects its
articulatory form, even after controlling for predictability.
Our goal in this paper, then, is to investigate the detailed effects of frequency and predictability on word
forms, draw out their implications for the direct and indirect mechanisms for probabilistic reduction, and see
whether they support differential access of content and
function words. Natural conversational speech is an appropriate data source. It exhibits strong effects of frequency
and predictability on articulatory forms, and equally
importantly, the complex planning of utterances at higher
levels is fully engaged with articulation. Our strategy is to
use a single global measure of reduction, namely word
duration, on the ground that it is in general sensitive to
most kinds of reduction (deletions, vowel reduction, reduced articulatory strength, etc.) whatever their locus in
the word. On the other hand, we need to consider a fairly
wide range of measures of frequency and predictability, given that they apparently affect words differently, and
examine their effects over the full range of word frequencies. And, of course, content and function words need to
be distinguished as well.

Materials and methods
The database for this study consists of 13,190 words
from the segmentally transcribed ICSI subcorpus of the
Switchboard corpus that have been transcribed for intonational accent and phrasing. Samples of one word from each
intonational phrase are drawn from this 13,190-word
database, yielding datasets of about 950–1400 words
depending on the class of words being considered. The effects of predictability factors on word duration were assessed by multiple regression analyses of word duration.
Words in disﬂuent speech were excluded from analysis,
as were words beginning or ending conversational turns.
The factors of phonological form, articulation rate, intonational accent, intonational phrase position, and speaker age
and sex were controlled by variables in the regression
analyses. Predictability variables comprise word frequency; conditional and joint probabilities of a word with
previous and following words; and repetition, whether or
not a word has occurred previously in the discourse.
In the following sections, we ﬁrst describe details of the
database extracted from the Switchboard corpus in ‘‘The
database”. This includes an account of the exclusion of cer-

96

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

tain classes of words (Exclusion of cases); the variables
used to control the factors listed above (Control factors);
the computation of frequency, predictability, and repetition variables (Computing frequency, predictability, and
repetition); and the coding of the lexical class variable
(Coding the lexical class distinction). ‘‘Frequency and predictability of content and function words” describes the
frequency and predictability characteristics of content
and function words. The procedures used for the regression
analysis of the data follow in ‘‘Regression analysis”. The
rationale for drawing samples from the database for the
analyses and the procedures used is explained in ‘‘Sampling and case selection”.
The database
The Switchboard corpus of 240 h of conversational
speech was collected at Texas Instruments in the early
1990s. It consists of telephone conversations between
pairs of volunteer speakers on suggested topics, the text
of which was transcribed at the word level (Godfrey, Holliman, & McDaniel, 1992). Approximately 4 h of fragments
(speech bounded by a turn and/or a 0.5-s silence) were
automatically extracted from the conversations and
hand-transcribed at ICSI (The International Computer Science Institute, Berkeley), yielding a transcription of segments and syllables, with time markers for syllables,
words, and pauses (Greenberg, Ellis, & Hollenback, 1996).
Intonational accent and phrasing has been transcribed for
about one-third of the ICSI corpus by Taylor, using the Tilt
conventions (Taylor, 2000), and by Ostendorf and colleagues, using a variant of the ToBI labelling system
(Ostendorf, Shafran, Shattuck-Hufnagel, Byrne, & Carmichael, 2001). This subset of 13,190 words constitutes our
database. It contains 1828 fragments from 924 conversations and 335 speakers. We coded the database for the part
of speech of each word, social variables for each speaker,
the presence of disﬂuent repetition strings, neighboring
pauses and ﬁlled pauses, predictability variables, and a
variety of phonetic and other control variables. Errors of
transcription, alignment, and time marking of words were
corrected or else the words were coded as ineligible.
Words are deﬁned by orthographic convention. Thus some
frequent combinations of words, probably lexicalized as
single compound words by many speakers (e.g. peace corps,
high school, ice cream), are necessarily treated as separate
words. Words with enclitics (e.g. it’s, you’re, today’ll) are
coded as single words, distinct from the unencliticized
forms (it, you, today). Also transcribed as words in Switchboard are the ﬁlled pauses uh and um and the discourse
markers huh and uhhuh. The database is thus a ﬁle of cases
or items, each one an instance of a word coded for the analysis variables described in the following sections.
Exclusion of cases
Some of the items in the 13,190-word database were
incomparable in one way or another. These were marked
as ineligible items and were thus excluded from the datasets used for analyses. The ﬁlled pauses uh and um and the
discourse markers huh and uhhuh were excluded. The discourse marker yeah was excluded; its very high frequency

is largely due to its use in short back-channel utterances.
The sequences you know and I mean were excluded because of their high frequency (137 and 20 instances in
the 13,190-word database) and usual use as discourse
markers. Acronyms which were transcribed as one word
for each letter, e.g. T V, C N N, F M, were excluded.
The largest group of exclusions was words in disﬂuent
contexts. Words next to a pause, next to a ﬁlled pause uh
or um, and words in disﬂuent repetition strings were excluded. A repetition string is a disﬂuent sequence that includes one or more repetitions of a word or word
sequence, possibly with intercalated pauses, ﬁlled pauses,
or editing terms. A simple example is I I uh I; more complex
ones are it’s I mean you know it’s and in um in the in the.
These were distinguished from planned repetitions such
as emphatic repetitions like good good or sequences of certain constructions like that that, is is, had had. Words in disﬂuent contexts were excluded because the relation
between duration and predictability is much more complex for them than for ones in ﬂuent speech. In the presence of disﬂuencies, words are, on average, longer and
less reduced; and function words, with high word frequencies, occur disproportionately often in these contexts (Bell
et al., 2003; Fox Tree & Clark, 1997; O’Shaughnessy, 1992;
Shriberg, 1995). And contextual predictabilities computed
from adjacent words in disﬂuencies are not comparable
to predictabilities in ﬂuent speech.
Words beginning or ending an ICSI fragment (which included conversational turn beginnings and endings) were
excluded from analysis, not only because of their special
prosodic nature, but because there is no measure of their
contextual predictability truly comparable to that for the
fragment-internal words. Finally, short intonational
phrases of three words or less were excluded, since a large
proportion of them are back-channel utterances or other
formulaic discourse responses (e.g. oh good grief). Overall,
the items that were excluded comprised almost half of
the items in the 13,190-word database, leaving 6938 eligible items.
Control factors
Factors which were controlled by regression variables
were word form, speech rate, intonational structure, and
speaker characteristics. Variables for these factors were retained in the control regression model if their addition to
the model improved its ﬁt at a signiﬁcance level of p < .20.
Word form is by far the most important source of variation in pronounced word duration. We considered three
variables to account for word form: average word length,
number of segments, and number of syllables. Average
word length was estimated indirectly, by summing the
average phone durations of the phones in the word’s lexical transcription. The average phone durations were computed over a portion of the ICSI corpus of Switchboard
that was segmented by phones, about 30 min and 45K
phones long. Especially for infrequent words, this avoids
the unreliability of a direct average over relatively few
samples and contexts. A word’s number of segments and
number of syllables was taken from its dictionary transcription in the ICSI corpus and hence was invariant, not
depending on the actual pronunciation. Various combina-

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

tions of these three variables and their interactions can be
used to control for word form. The simplest and most
effective combination was log average word length
(mirroring the use of log duration for the response
variable) and number of syllables; number of segments
was not a signiﬁcant addition to these two (p > .20). The
importance of number of syllables is consistent with
many observations that syllable durations shrink as their
number increases within a word, as in, for example, luck
becoming successively shorter in luck, lucky, luckily
(Lehiste, 1970).
Rate of speech was measured in (dictionary) syllables/s,
calculated within an ICSI fragment over pause-delimited
stretches. It thus corresponds roughly to a measure of
articulatory rate over a variable time domain. The actual
variable used in the regression analyses was the transform
log rate, since it was more effective than untransformed
rate.
Binary contrast variables speciﬁed whether a word began an intonational phrase or not and whether it ended
an intonational phrase or not. Initial phrase position
was dropped from the analyses because it did not add
signiﬁcantly to the control model (p > .20). A single binary variable was used to code intonational accent, accented versus unaccented, ignoring various possible
distinctions among types of accents. Each word was also
marked according to the presence or absence of an accent on the preceding, prepreceding, following, and postfollowing words. These contextual accent variables had
no signiﬁcant effect and were not used in the analyses
(p > .20).
The age and sex of the speaker also affected word durations. Older speakers have longer durations. Whether the
speaker was a man or woman mainly inﬂuenced durations
through a strong interaction with rate of speech, with men
speaking at faster rates.
All the included variables except for speaker age
(p < .10) were signiﬁcant at the level of p < .005 or less;
variables that were considered, but excluded, had signiﬁcance levels of p > .20.
The control regression model thus consisted of eight
variables:









log average word length
number of syllables
log rate of speech
intonational accent
end of intonational phrase
speaker age
speaker sex
speaker sex Â log rate of speech.

Computing frequency, predictability, and repetition
The prior probability and predictability of words were
estimated from counts of occurrences in the 2.4-millionword Switchboard corpus. Since these are counts of the
written word forms they correspond more closely to
counts of lexemes or forms than to lemma counts. Note,
however, that they are not quite the same as counts of phonological forms, since they conﬂate the occurrences of

97

homographs with different pronunciations (e.g. lead (N),
lead (V)) and split the occurrence of homophones with different spellings (e.g. sew, sow). A word’s probability of
occurrence is estimated by its relative frequency, C(wi)/N,
the count of each word divided by the number of words
in the corpus. The joint probability of a word wi with the
previous word wiÀ1 is estimated by the relative frequency
of the two words together, C(wiÀ1wi)/N; the joint probability with the following word, by C(wiwi+1)/N. The conditional probability of x given y is given by the ratio Prob(x
and y)/Prob(y). Thus the conditional probability of a word
given the previous word can be estimated by the ratio of
two counts: C(wiÀ1wi) divided by C(wiÀ1). The conditional
probability given the following word is estimated by
C(wiwi+1)/C(wi+1). (In later discussion, we use the shorter
terms ‘‘previous conditional probability” and ‘‘following
conditional probability” to refer to the conditional probabilities of the current word given the previous word and given the following word, respectively.) Another measure of
contextual probability, mutual information of x and y, is
the ratio Prob(x and y)/Prob(x) Prob(y), and is estimated
by the ratio of the appropriate counts.
Repetition of a word was represented by the number of
times that the same lexeme had been previously spoken in
the conversation, either by the speaker or by the listener.
These were raw counts, including disﬂuent repetitions
and homographs. Several transformations of the raw
counts were used in the analyses. To avoid overweighting
items with high counts, we used log counts and truncated
counts (e.g. all values greater than or equal to 20 merged as
the highest value). In order to assess whether more than
one repetition had an additional effect, contrast variables
coding various higher ranges of repetitions were combined
with a basic binary contrast of ﬁrst mention versus subsequent mention.
Coding the lexical class distinction
The distinction between content and function words
was obtained by ﬁrst using the Brill (1995) part-of-speech
tagger to label all the words and then editing the resulting
word labels by hand. The corrections were fairly extensive
and involved changes in appropriate contexts such as okay
and well from modiﬁer to discourse marker, one’s from
noun to pronoun, that from noun to demonstrative. We
also examined words likely to occur in more than one category such as so (discourse marker, proform (as in I thought
so), or intensiﬁer) and verb forms like have, do, is, etc. (verb
or auxiliary), and corrected their labels. Then we collapsed
the labeled categories into the binary distinction of content
versus function. The function-word category included discourse markers, conjunctions, existential there, pronouns
and other proforms, prepositions, articles, quantiﬁers,
demonstratives, verb auxiliaries, and verb particles. The
remainder, nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives, made
up the content-word category.
Frequency and predictability of content and function words
We use the logarithmic transform of frequency and predictability variables in our analyses. This is the usual practice for such variables, which range over several orders of

98

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111
Table 1
Median log10 frequencies and conditional probabilities of content and
function words

1800
1600

Factor

1400
all words

1200
1000
800

Content words Function words

Word frequency
Conditional probability given previous
Conditional probability given following

À3.37
À2.41
À2.52

À1.93
À1.52
À1.38

content words
function words

600

Although any single measure can be expected to show an
effect on duration, such a ﬁnding alone cannot rule out that
the effect is actually due to one or more of the others. The
correlation of accent with the content/function distinction
and with the predictability variables underscores the need
to control for its effects on duration.

400
200
0
-6

-5

-4
-3
log frequency

-2

Fig. 1. Histogram of the distribution of word tokens by log frequency
(N = 13,190).

magnitude and are typically asymmetrical and have long
tails. In effect, we are considering relative differences in
these variables, rather than absolute ones (e.g. treating
the doubling of a frequency of .0001 to .0002 as equivalent
to doubling .00001 to .00002, not a 10-times greater increase). Log word frequency in English is still asymmetrical, as well as bimodal, as can be seen from the
histogram of word tokens in Fig. 1. The ﬁgure also shows
the distribution of function-word frequency and contentword frequency in the 13,190-word database, and how
much higher function-word frequencies are than contentword frequencies. The double peak at the higher frequencies is largely a characteristic of function words, although
content words also have a moderate second peak of higher-frequency words. The separate peak of highest-frequency words is composed of the 10 most frequent
function words. The most frequent content word, at
log10 frequency = À1.85 (frequency of .0014), is know,
whose high frequency comes mainly from the common
discourse marker you know. Function words are not only
more frequent, but more predictable than content words.
This is conﬁrmed in Table 1, a comparison of the median
values of frequency and conditional probabilities of content and function words.
The strong correlations between factors that affect
word duration, namely lexical class, frequency and predictability, accent, and repetition, are displayed in Table 2. Because the measures of frequency and predictability are so
highly correlated, it is hard to distinguish their effects.

Regression analysis
Linear regression is the statistical tool employed to sort
out how factors of interest inﬂuence the pronounced form
of words. A regression model accounts for the variation in a
response variable in terms of a linear combination of
explanatory variables.
The response variable in this study is word duration.
We chose this variable instead of other possible measures
of lenition such as segment deletion or vowel reduction,
both because it is sensitive to most kinds of form variation
and because it is generally applicable to words of all types.
Since we are normally interested in comparing relative differences in duration, rather than absolute ones (so that we
do not, for example, equate a 30-ms change in a 50-ms
word to a 30-ms change in a 300-ms word), the actual variable used in the regression analyses is the base-10 logarithm of word duration.
The explanatory variables can be divided for our purposes into two groups. The control variables, whose effects
are known to be present and are not being investigated
here, are the variables of word form, prosodic context, rate
of speech and speaker characteristics described above in
‘‘Control factors”. These variables account for 66% of the
variation in log duration when content and function words
are considered together.
The variables of interest are frequency, contextual-predictability variables, repetition, and the content–function
distinction. Joint probability, conditional probability, and
mutual information are closely related measures of contextual predictability. If a single measure of frequency and
predictability is used, mutual information makes a good
choice. To take the example of predictability from the pre-

Table 2
Correlation coefﬁcients for selected variables
Factor
Duration
Content/function
Word frequency
Previous conditional
Following conditional
Accent

Content/function

Frequency

Previous conditional

Following conditional

Accent

Repetition

.61

À.70
À.64

À.53
À.43
.69

À.59
À.50
.69
.45

.48
.41
À.46
À.36
À.37

À.48
À.43
.62
.44
.44
À.30

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

vious word, recall that mutual information is the ratio of
the frequency of a word occurring together with the previous word to the product of the individual frequencies of
the word and of the previous word. It thus measures how
much more or less likely it is that two words occur together than would be expected from just their overall frequencies. We did not use this measure, however, because
its denominator contains the factor of word frequency, a
factor of independent interest here. Instead, we used conditional probabilities and joint probabilities, which do not
include the frequency of the target word in their deﬁnition.
As a measure of contextual predictability, conditional
probability is preferable to joint probability. Joint probability is the likelihood of two words occurring together; it has
the disadvantage that it does not distinguish the combination of two unrelated high-frequency words from the combination of lower-frequency words that commonly occur
together. Thus we expected that conditional probability
would be a more effective predictability factor. This turned
out to be the case—joint probabilities with preceding and
following words were not as effective predictors of duration as conditional probabilities, and did not make any signiﬁcant addition to conditional probabilities in the
regression models. They were thus dropped from the analyses and are not reported in the results.
The contributions of the explanatory factors can be
ascertained by adding them to the control regression model. When, as is the case here, the explanatory variables are
strongly correlated, not all of them can be expected to contribute signiﬁcantly to the ﬁt of the model. The factors
which do make a contribution can be evaluated by comparing regression models of signiﬁcant explanatory variables with and without the factor in question. The added
factor is deemed to be a signiﬁcant factor if it improves
the ﬁt of the model sufﬁciently, as tested by the F statistic
over the variance accounted for by the model. As indicators
of the signiﬁcance of a factor, we report the value of the F
statistic and its associated probability value. (For most results, only the approximate degrees of freedom of the Fstatistic denominator are reported, not the exact value
for each test, since it varies slightly, and in practice, inconsequentially, according to the number of variables in the
model.) In addition to factor signiﬁcance, we generally report DR2, how much the addition of a factor increases R2,
the percentage of the variability accounted for by the
regression variable. Since regression coefﬁcients are notoriously unstable in models with highly correlated factors
(Hocking, 2003, chap. 5) we have not generally used them
to report factors’ estimated effects on duration.
Sampling and case selection
A fundamental assumption of multiple linear regression
is that the cases analyzed are independent. This rules out
analyzing all the word tokens of a conversational corpus
because adjacent or neighboring words are surely mutually
dependent in numerous ways. One way to avoid this
sequential dependence is to restrict the analysis to a single
word or small set of words. This is the approach used by
Jurafsky et al. (2001) for content words ending in t or d,
Bell et al. (2003) for 10 function words, and Pluymaekers

99

et al. (2005a) for seven common Dutch words with the sufﬁx -lijk. The sets of words in the ﬁrst two of these studies
were large enough that dependence was only reduced,
not avoided, since a fair number of the cases analyzed were
in fact adjacent (e.g. and it, child laughed).
This study, which aims to assess predictability effects
over broad classes of words, used another strategy, namely
drawing samples of word tokens to avoid sequential
dependencies. A number of sampling schemes are possible; for example, a simple one would be to choose every
fourth (or ﬁfth) word. We chose a more conservative procedure of taking only one word from each intonational
phrase, reﬂecting the expected greater dependencies within phrases than across them, and avoiding possible positional biases. To do this, the 13,190-word database was
ﬁrst divided into intonational phrases. (In technical terms,
phrase breaks of level 3 were taken to delimit phrases.)
Then the words in each phrase were marked as ineligible
if they had been excluded for reasons discussed earlier in
‘‘Exclusion of cases”. For each intonational phrase, one
word was randomly selected from the eligible words in
the phrase, if any. So, for example, separate samples were
drawn for content words, for function words, and for all
words without restriction to lexical class. We did not split
the overall sample to obtain subsamples of content and
function words, because this would have greatly reduced
the power of the separate analyses. Conversely, pooling
the content- and function-word samples to form an overall
sample would have resulted in some words belonging to
the same intonational phrase, defeating the original purpose of avoiding dependent cases. Thus the use of separate
samples to investigate the two lexical classes (and different frequency ranges, as described below) maintains comparable power among the analyses and avoids sequential
dependencies throughout.
Another violation of the case-independence assumption
is that some of the word tokens in this data are spoken by
the same speaker. Sampling one word from an intonational
phrase reduces the number of word tokens per speaker
considerably, but there are still clusters of word tokens
for most speakers. For the sample of content words without high-frequency homonyms, there are 1238 word tokens and 282 speakers, about 4.5 word tokens per
speaker. For most of the speakers, the clusters are small—
more than three-quarters of the speakers have six or fewer
word tokens in the sample. A few speakers have large clusters—ﬁve speakers have 18 or more tokens. The distribution of speakers and words in the other samples is
similar. As a consequence, the signiﬁcance probabilities reported in the results are inﬂated to some degree. This is unlikely to affect the main results, since they are very highly
signiﬁcant at probability levels of .0001 or less. Some of the
results, however, are less secure. Nevertheless, as a conservative measure, we have retained factors with signiﬁcances of p < .05 in our full models when assessing the
signiﬁcance of the additional contributions of the other
factors.
Another potential problem is posed by the distribution
of word frequency. Segalowitz and Lane (2000) point out
that the log frequency distribution of their stimulus items
(taken from a set of constructed sentences) is bimodal,

100

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

with high-frequency function words forming a second
peak at the upper tail. The words in our conversational database are also bimodally distributed, as described above in
‘‘Frequency and predictability of content and function
words” and Fig. 1. Moreover, the high-frequency words
are exceptionally variable function words, and the control
variable of word form, which is based on an assumed segmental representation, may not be as appropriate for them.
To assure that the words in the upper frequency peak are
not overly inﬂuencing patterns of probabilistic reduction,
we examined the high-frequency function words that constitute the upper peak separately from the rest of the function words. These high-frequency words are the 10 most
common function words whose form variation was examined by Bell et al. (2003) (I, and, the, that, a, to, you, of, it, in).
The upper frequency range of content words also contains some words which might skew the analysis, but for
different reasons. The upper 5th frequency percentile of
content words consists of know, have, and so. The unusually high frequency of know is largely due to its occurrence
in the common discourse marker you know. The words
have and so have high frequencies because they are homonyms of very frequent function words (e.g. have, as main
verb or auxiliary). The forms of have, be, and do are also
common words which are content–function homonyms.
Since they are frequent forms, with much of their frequency from occurrences as function words, they might
have an anomalous effect on the analysis of content words.
Accordingly, content words without these frequent content–function homonyms were analyzed separately to
guard against this possibility.
For the analysis of content and function words combined, where content and function words are directly compared, the skewing of function words to the higher
frequencies and of content words to the lower frequencies
is the primary concern. To address this, the word-frequency range was partitioned into three: high-frequency
words, mid-frequency words, and low-frequency words.
An upper division point of log10 frequency = À2.1 (frequency = .008) was chosen at the 5th percentile point of
content words in the 13,190-word database and a lower
division point of À3.1 (frequency = .0008) at the 95th percentile point of function words. This gives roughly equal
frequency ranges of high, 34%; mid, 36%; and low, 30% of
the words in the 13,190-word database. Most (93%) of
the high-frequency words are function words. The mid-frequency range is where function words and content words
overlap; it is divided into 57% function words and 43% content words, very close to the 55%/45% split for all frequencies. And the low-frequency words are mostly (90%)
content words. Separate analyses were made for the full
frequency range of words, for the mid/low-frequency
words, and for the mid-frequency words.
There were between 4 and 14 cases with residual values
greater than three standard deviations in the analyses. All
cases were retained, since upon examination most appeared to be natural, just short pronunciations (e.g. an reduced to syllabic n in on an old, think as [çN] in can’t think of)
or long pronunciations (perhaps expressive). We chose not
to second-guess the ICSI transcriptions of a few cases with
ambiguous (e.g. vowel–vowel) syllable divisions.

In the course of this research we considered two alternative approaches worth mentioning. In addition to log
frequency, we analyzed our data with the variable frequency rank, in case the nonnormal distribution of word
frequency affected the regression analyses. The results
were very similar to those reported for log frequency. In
addition to the conditional probabilities given the previous
word and given the following word, we also examined conditional probabilities given the previous two words, given
the following two words, and given both the previous
and following words. None of these were signiﬁcant additions to the models (F < 1).

Results
The results for content words are presented ﬁrst, based
on a sample restricted to content words. The possible inﬂuence of certain high-frequency content words which have
function-word homonyms (e.g. have, as main verb or auxiliary) is addressed here, as well as the inﬂuence of frequent collocations (e.g. kind of). Results for function
words follow in the next section, based on separate
samples of function words. This section compares veryhigh-frequency function words with mid/low-frequency
function words, and, again, treats the inﬂuence of certain
frequent collocations. The two classes of words are then
compared directly (‘‘All words”), based on results from a
third sample of both content and function words. The analyses are based on separate samples drawn from the appropriate subsets of words in the entire 13,190-word
database. (See ‘‘Sampling and case selection” above.) Thus,
for example, the content-word sample is not a subset of
the sample of all words, and the sum of the content- and
function-word sample sizes does not equal the size of the
all-word sample.
Content words
For content words, following conditional probability and
word frequency are the strongest factors affecting pronounced duration. There is also a strong interaction
between word frequency and following conditional probability: the shortening effect of predictability from the following word is diminished for lower-frequency words
(and vice versa). Previous conditional probability, however,
is not a signiﬁcant factor for content words. Repeated words
have shorter pronunciations, but the difference is only nominally signiﬁcant in this sample. Factor effects for the content-word sample are presented in Table 3.
In addition to the interaction of word frequency with
following conditional probability, the quadratic variables
of (word frequency)2 and (following conditional probability)2 are also signiﬁcant additions to the model containing
frequency, following conditional probability, and repetition. Regressions with any one of these interaction or quadratic variables indicate that the predictability and
frequency effects on form reduction are stronger at higher
levels of frequency and/or predictability. Only the interaction of frequency with following conditional probability
has been retained in Table 3. It is the strongest of the three

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111
Table 3
Predictability factors affecting duration of content words

DR2 F(1, $1275) Signiﬁcance
(%)
(p)

Factor
Main factors
Frequency
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability
Repetition

1.36
1.13
.06
.13

< .00005
< .00005
.12
< .05

.50

Interactions
Frequency Â following conditional
probability

51.4
42.7
2.5
5.0
19.1

< .00005

Nonsigniﬁcant interactions are not included in the table.

factors, and since they all compete with each other, a model with any two is no improvement. Nevertheless, the differences among these terms are small, so it is not possible
to conclude for this data whether the increased effect is a
combination of frequency and predictability, or just limited to frequency, or just limited to following
predictability.
To assess the possible inﬂuence of the content words
with frequent function-word homonyms, we analyzed a
separate sample that excluded such items, as described
above in ‘‘Sampling and case selection”. Results from this
dataset are shown in Table 4. The main effects for the probabilistic variables are essentially the same as those for the
sample of all content words, conﬁrming that they are not
unduly inﬂuenced by the high-frequency homonyms. The
factors that account for greater reduction at higher levels
of frequency or predictability do differ, though. When the
high-frequency content–function homonyms are excluded,
(word frequency)2 is a highly signiﬁcant factor, and is
much stronger than either the interaction of frequency
and following predictability or (following conditional
probability)2, both F < 1. We conclude that the main source
of the increased effects is word frequency, since it appears
that effects involving following conditional probability
were inﬂuenced by the inclusion of the high-frequency
content–function homonyms.
Without the high-frequency function-word homonyms,
there is a stronger repetition effect for content words. The
magnitude of the effect is relatively small, however—the
estimated relative duration of subsequent mentions is
4.5% less than ﬁrst mentions, accent and probabilistic variables being equal. The most effective repetition variable
was the binary contrast between ﬁrst mentions versus all
subsequent mentions, which is reported in Table 4. Other
measures of repetition were less effective: raw number

Table 4
Predictability factors affecting duration of content words excluding highfrequency homonyms
Factor
Main factors
Frequency
Frequency2
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability
Repetition

DR2 (%) F(1, $1220) Signiﬁcance (p)
1.44
.68
1.54
.01
.24

52.3
25.2
57.0
<1
8.7

< .00005
< .00005
< .00005
NS
<.005

101

of repetitions was not signiﬁcant, p = 10. Measures which
reduced the effect of multiple repetitions were better, the
best of which was the log of the number of repetitions
(p < .01). To address the question whether or not there is
further shortening of mentions subsequent to the second
one, a binary contrast variable opposing words which were
second mentions to words which had occurred three or
more times was added to the ﬁrst-mention variable. (There
are 678 ﬁrst mentions in the sample; repeated mentions
are split fairly evenly, 237 second mentions to 297 cases
mentioned more than twice.) This variable made no significant addition to the ﬁt of the model (F < 1). There is thus
no evidence from this data that repetition reduction increases as the number of repetitions increases.
It might be expected that the effect would be found
mainly with nouns, if it is one of repeated referents. There
was no interaction of repetition with the contrast between
nouns and verbs/adjectives/adverbs. Similar results came
from separate analyses of the two classes (476 nouns,
736 verbs/adjectives/adverbs). Repeated nouns have shorter pronunciations, F(1, 466) = 4.1, p < .05. Repeated verbs/
adjectives/adverbs also have shorter pronunciations,
F(1, 725) = 6.2, p = .01. This data thus is consistent with
the hypothesis that the repetition effect applies to the entire class of content words.
Another issue concerns the effect of the item of analysis,
namely orthographic words. Many orthographic word sequences are surely single lexical entries. These include frequent collocations such as lot of, kind of, in fact, of course, as
well as many compounds such as income tax, New York,
high school, etc., which are conventionally written as separate words. Words in such sequences characteristically
have very high conditional predictabilities, and presumably have shorter pronunciations than they would have
in other contexts, by virtue of the weakening processes
that are associated with compounds and similar constructions. If these collocations had been treated as single lexical entries, the durations would still be relatively short, but
their word frequencies would have been much lower than
the component words, and the high conditional probabilities between the components would not be present. The effect on the present analysis would be to decrease the
shortening effects of both word frequency and conditional
probabilities. (To some extent this would be compensated
by an increase in the weight of the factor of syllable count.)
It is thus important to establish that the frequency and predictability effects on duration are not artifacts of word definition. Reanalyzing the data with such collocations as
single cases is not practical with this data. And while some
collocations such as those mentioned can be identiﬁed
with some assurance, there is such a gradation of collocation that one could not reasonably hope to identify exactly
which ones are lexical entries. What is and isn’t a lexical
entry varies from one speaker to another; it is also plausible that many collocations can be retrieved from the lexicon either as word sequences or as single entries. We
therefore used two modiﬁed analyses to ascertain the effect of collocations. First, from the sample of content words
without high-frequency homonyms, we excluded 20 cases
of kind of (in the sense of ‘‘somewhat”) and lot of, since
these were numerous and arguably single lexical words.

102

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

Their exclusion changed the results of Table 4 only in minor details. Second, we excluded a larger number of cases
with the highest values of mutual information, a bilateral
predictability index that has been effective in identifying
collocations (Manning & Schütze, 1999, chap. 5). (These
were 195 cases out of 1238 whose values of the log10 of
preceding or following mutual information were greater
than 2.28.) The remaining cases contained very few sequences that we judged to be candidates for lexicalization.
In this smaller sample, the effects of frequency and following conditional probability were a little weaker, as expected, but overall, the results were the same: Frequency,
frequency2, and following conditional probability were still
highly signiﬁcant (p < .00005); and repetition signiﬁcance
was still p < .005. This indicates that lexicalized collocations are but a minor contribution to frequency and predictability effects on content-word durations in this data;
nor are they responsible for the greater degree of reduction
at higher levels of frequency.
Function words
Recall that the high-frequency function words constitute
a separate peak in the frequency distribution (‘‘Frequency
and predictability of content and function words” and
Fig. 1), and may have other special characteristics. We thus
examine ﬁrst a sample of function words that excludes the
10 highest-frequency function words, called the mid/lowfrequency sample, since it is likely to best reﬂect the general
characteristics of function words. Then we examine the
high-frequency sample that consists of the 10 most frequent
function words (log10 frequency < À2.0) listed earlier in
‘‘Frequency and predictability of content and function
words”. An analysis of all the function words follows.
The relative durations of the 10 high-frequency words
are sensitive to the segmental context of the following
word, mainly because they are all monosyllables, half with
open syllables, half with closed syllables. Five variables
were added to the control model for this sample only to account for this inﬂuence: open/closed syllable, following
consonant/vowel, following full/reduced vowel, and interactions of open/closed with the other two variables. (Following context is not as important, in addition to the
other control variables, for the more complex and more
variable word forms in the other samples.)
For the mid/low-frequency function words, following
conditional probability is the only strongly signiﬁcant factor. Previous conditional probability barely reaches .05 signiﬁcance, and word frequency makes no contribution at
all. The effects are summarized in Table 5.
For high-frequency function words, previous conditional probability is the most signiﬁcant factor affecting
word duration; word frequency is a moderately signiﬁcant
factor (see Table 6). The lack of any effect of following conditional probability is surprising. It is not consistent with
the signiﬁcant effects of following conditional probability
found individually for seven of the same high-frequency
function words in Bell et al. (2003). (Bell et al. also found
an overall effect for following conditional probability. They
did not control for intonational accent, however, nor were
the cases sampled.) Interpreting the inﬂuence of word fre-

quency in this sample is problematic. This is because with
only 10 words, differences in their frequencies are necessarily confounded with individual differences in their phonological characteristics and the structures they occur in.
Frequency for these words mainly distinguishes the three
most frequent words, I, and, and the, from the rest. In particular, the control variable for word length, based on the
average durations of the assumed underlying segments of
each word, may not be so appropriate for this sample of
highly variable words as it is generally. That this may be
the case is supported by an alternative measure of word
length, simply the average duration of each word over
the ICSI corpus. Word frequency is not a signiﬁcant factor
for high-frequency function words in a regression with this
variable (F = 6.9, p = .09).
The differences between the two frequency classes of
function words are clariﬁed by the analysis of a sample
drawn from both classes, whose effects are summarized
in Table 7. The models in this analysis include a binary variable (frequency split), which contrasts the high-frequency
words with the remaining mid- and low-frequency ones.
This variable is the strongest factor in the analysis and displaces word frequency. (The frequency-split factor was signiﬁcant even in addition to a model including word
frequency, whereas word frequency after frequency split
was not. Nor was there any interaction between the two
variables.) Both conditional probabilities are signiﬁcant
factors. The interactions, although at moderate signiﬁcance
levels, conﬁrm that the effect of previous conditional probability is largely characteristic of the high-frequency function words, whereas the effect of following conditional
probability is more associated with the mid- and low-frequency function words. Repetition of function words has
no shortening effect, in contrast to content words.
Recall also that the effect of previous conditional probability did not occur with content words. This suggests that
this effect arises to some extent from those function words
that combine closely with preceding words. To explore this
Table 5
Predictability factors affecting duration of mid/low-frequency function
words
Factor
Main factors
Frequency
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability

DR2 (%)

F(1, $935)

.00
1.23
.27

<1
17.7
3.9

Signiﬁcance (p)
NS
.0001
< .05

Table 6
Predictability factors affecting duration of high-frequency function words
Factor
Main factors
Frequency
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability
Interactions
Frequency Â previous conditional
probability

DR2 F(1, $945) Signiﬁcance
(%)
(p)
.68
.00
1.08

9.8
<1
15.5

.53

7.6

< .002
NS
.0001
<.01

103

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111
Table 7
Predictability factors affecting duration of function words
Factor
Main factors
Frequency
Frequency split
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability
Interactions
Frequency split Â following conditional
probability
Frequency split Â previous conditional
probability
Following conditional
probability Â previous conditional
probability

DR2 F(1, $1235) Signiﬁcance
(%)
(p)
.05
1.37
.90
.80

1.2
33.1
21.8
19.5

NS
< .00005
< .00005
< .00005

.44

10.8

.001

.17

4.2

< .05

.18

4.5

< .05

Frequency split is the binary contrast between high-frequency and mid/
low-frequency words.

possibility, we looked at the high-frequency function
words by their values of mutual information with the previous word, a measure which is useful for picking out collocations of words. It turned out that the word
combinations with the highest values were dominated by
of and to, and included numerous instances of special sequences such as kind of, going to, and have to, which are frequently encliticized, or have idiosyncratic pronunciations.
Some, like those just cited, have noncomponential meanings. The high-frequency function words were reanalyzed
in two ways to judge the effect of such cases. The ﬁrst
was to exclude forms likely to have idiosyncratic pronunciations: kind of, sort of, lot of, some of, ought to, used to, going
to, want to, have to, and got to. Excluding 59 instances of
these sequences reduced the signiﬁcance of previous conditional probability (DR2 = .47, F(1, 886) = 6.5, p = .01). The
second analysis excluded 112 cases whose mutual information with the previous word was greater than 1.2. This
eliminated most of the putative special sequences, but also
sequences such as live in, issued a, percent of, and hard to,
which, although highly predictable, do not seem to be candidates for special lexical forms, on the basis either of form
or meaning. Previous conditional probability was not a signiﬁcant factor in this analysis (DR2 = .20, F(1, 831) = 2.5,
p = .11), presumably not just from loss of power, since
the signiﬁcance of word frequency was only reduced from
p < .002 to .005. While the effect of previous conditional
probability may not be entirely due to the presence of lexicalized collocations, it is certainly ampliﬁed by them, and
is undoubtedly due to a few of the 10 function words, especially of and to, that are strongly associated with certain
preceding words.
Word frequency appears not to have much inﬂuence on
the word forms of function words. There was no effect for
the mid/low-frequency function words, even though they
represent a range of frequency differences of over 10 to
1. Nor was there a frequency effect for the function words
as a whole, once the difference between the high-frequency words and the rest was accounted for. Since the
frequency range for the 10 highest-frequency function
words is much less, about three to one, the frequency effect
found for those words is suspect. As suggested above, it is

likely that the frequency variable encodes individual differences in the combinatorial behavior and form variation
of the words rather than a difference in behavior attributable directly to their frequency of occurrence. As a group,
however, the highest-frequency function words are more
susceptible to reduction than other function words, independently of their higher frequency, as the split variable
shows when all function words are analyzed together.
All words
We now turn to the direct comparison of content words
and function words. Results from the analysis of a sample
drawn from both classes are summarized in Table 8. The
strongest predictor of duration in this analysis is lexical
class, the distinction between content and function words.
Function words have relatively shorter pronounced durations than content words, after accounting for the effects
of the predictability variables and their interactions. After
accounting for lexical class, following conditional probability and word frequency are also signiﬁcant factors. Previous conditional probability is marginally signiﬁcant. No
effects were found for repetition or its interactions.
Because effects of the frequency and predictability variables differed for function and content words when they
were considered separately, we expect to ﬁnd that those
variables interact with lexical class when content and
function words are considered together. Given the strong
correlation of lexical class with frequency, however, lexical-class interactions will compete with frequency interactions. One or the other might be signiﬁcant additions to the
regression model; it is less likely that both would be.
There was a strong interaction of previous conditional
probability with lexical class. This is expected, because
the differences found in the separate analyses were more
strongly connected to the lexical class differences than to
frequency differences. That is, previous conditional probability was not a factor for content words at all, and its effects on function words were mainly limited to the highfrequency words.
Both the interaction of following conditional probability
with frequency (in the positive direction), as well as the
quadratic variable frequency2, were signiﬁcant factors
individually. As with content words, these two factors
competed strongly with each other. Frequency2 was the
stronger effect, and is the only factor reported in Table 8,
Table 8
Factors affecting the duration of all words
Factor
Main factors
Content vs function (lexical class)
Frequency
Frequency2
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability
Interactions
Lexical class Â previous conditional
probability
Lexical class Â log rate

DR2
(%)

F(1, $1365)

Signiﬁcance
(p)

.96
.25
.22
.65
.11

49.0
12.9
11.1
33.3
5.7

< .00005
< .0005
< .001
< .00005
< .02

.24

12.3

.0005

.05

2.5

.11

104

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

since the interaction of following conditional probability
with frequency made no signiﬁcant further addition to
the ﬁt of the model. Thus the stronger frequency and/or
predictability effects at higher levels outweighed the lack
of an effect of following conditional probability for highfrequency function words.
Finally, the interaction between lexical class and frequency was signiﬁcant when added to the main-effect factors. This reﬂects the fact that frequency was a strong
factor for content words, but not signiﬁcant for function
words, except for the highest-frequency ones. Note that
the direction of this interaction (stronger frequency effects
for the lower-frequency content words) outweighs the
shorter duration of the high-frequency function words
and stronger frequency effects at higher frequencies for
content words. The lexical-class/frequency interaction
competes with the conditional-probability interactions.
Consequently, it was no longer a signiﬁcant addition to
the model including the previous conditional-probability
interaction and frequency2, and is not reported in Table 8.
This sample composed of all word classes is the one
most appropriate for reassessing the control variables.
While the factors that they represent are known from
other studies to affect word durations, it is worth verifying
that they remain signiﬁcant factors in a full model including the probabilistic variables and lexical category. For the
model including the signiﬁcant variables in Table 8, the
regression coefﬁcients of the control variables all have signiﬁcant one-tailed t values. Log rate, accent, and average
word length are signiﬁcant at the level of p < .00005; number of syllables, at p = .0001; sex, at p < .001; ﬁnal intonational phrase position and sex Â log rate, p < .002; and
age, p < .05.
Table 9 summarizes results for the analysis of a sample
of the mid/low-frequency words, which excludes the highfrequency words above log frequency À2.1 (above frequency .008). Recall that these high-frequency words are
almost all function words. Lexical class continues to be
the strongest factor, conﬁrming that this difference is not
due to the special characteristics of the high-frequency
function words. Following conditional probability is also
a strong factor, reﬂecting its importance for both content
and function words in this sample. Without the inﬂuence
of the high-frequency function words, the inﬂuence of frequency is much weaker, marginal at best. Previous conditional probability is still marginal, not much changed.
There were no signiﬁcant interactions. This was to be expected for the previous conditional-probability interaction.
The lack of other signiﬁcant interactions with frequency or

Table 9
Predictability factors affecting duration of mid/low-frequency words
Factor
Main factors
Content vs. function (lexical class)
Frequency
Following conditional probability
Previous conditional probability

DR 2
(%)
2.77
.11
1.10
.12

There were no signiﬁcant interactions.

F(1, $1355)

111.8
4.5
44.5
5.0

Signiﬁcance
(p)
< .00005
< .05
< .00005
< .05

of a frequency2 factor may be related to frequency’s marginal signiﬁcance when high-frequency words are
excluded.
Since it is only in the mid-frequency region that content
and function words mainly overlap, we also analyzed a
sample of just mid-frequency words to ensure that the
low-frequency words, almost all content words, did not affect the results. The results did not differ essentially from
the mid/low-frequency words.
Discussion
These results clarify some of the important questions
about the relationship between words’ frequency, predictability, and articulatory form raised in the introduction.
Content- and function-word durations clearly differ in
their sensitivity to probabilistic variables and repetition.
Moreover, high-frequency function words differ from
mid- and low-frequency function words. Effects of the
variables are compared for these three classes of words
in Table 10. Word frequency, once contextual-predictability
factors are taken into account, is an additional contributing
factor for content words; it is not a factor for the mid/lowfrequency function words; and it is probably not a factor
for the high-frequency function words either. Durational
effects of previous conditional probability are largely limited
to high-frequency function words. Following conditional
probability has the widest application of the probabilistic
variables. It is an important factor for content words and
mid/low-frequency function words. Although no effect
was found in this data, it probably also inﬂuences the durations of some high-frequency function words, given the results of Bell et al. (2003). Repeated content words, but not
function words, have shorter pronunciations than ﬁrst
occurrences, after accounting for intonational and predictability factors.
Furthermore, there are differences in the pronounced
durations of the three classes of words: High-frequency
function words are relatively shorter than mid/low-frequency function words, and the mid/low-frequency function words are relatively shorter than content words, in
addition to any frequency or predictability effects. Hence
both lexical class and word frequency are required to fully
account for variation in word durations.
Effects of frequency on duration are stronger for
words which are more frequent. (There is some suggestion that there may also be a similar reinforcing effect
between frequency and following conditional probability

Table 10
Summary of predictability effects
High-frequency
function words
Word
frequency
Previous
conditional
Following
conditional
Repetition

Mid/low-frequency
function words

NS

NS

Highly
signiﬁcant
NS

Marginally
signiﬁcant
Highly signiﬁcant

NS

NS

Content words
Highly
signiﬁcant
NS
Highly
signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

for content words.) The effect is the reverse of the relationship found by Grifﬁn and Bock (1998), namely that
the frequency effect of lexical access was diminished
for highly predictable contexts. Note also that in their
lexical decision study, Segalowitz and Lane (2000) found
stronger associations of latency and frequency for lowerfrequency words.
Not all predictability variables affected duration in this
data; some made no signiﬁcant contribution to the ﬁt of
the regression models in addition to the variables discussed above. There were no predictability effects on duration from words more distant than the previous or
following word. There was no overall effect of conditional
probability given both previous and following words,
although this does affect the durations of at least the conjunction and, as pointed out below in ‘‘Multiple sources for
contextual-predictability reduction”. And there was no
additional effect of the joint probabilities with the previous
and with the following words. This does not necessarily
mean that these measures of predictability have no association with word durations. It could mean that the cases
where their effect is much greater than the average effect
of the accompanying frequency and previous/following
conditional-probability factors do not occur very often, at
least in this data. Nor does it exclude the possibility that
there are additional effects of global context that are not
captured by these variables, although at present there are
no practical ways to quantify such predictability variables
for conversational texts.
The ﬁnding that when content words are repeated, they
are shorter, whereas repeated function words do not shorten, extends earlier research in several ways. They conﬁrm
that the repetition effect holds in spontaneous conversational speech. Further, they indicate that the effect is both
in addition to the shortening of second mentions by a reduced expectation of accentuation, conﬁrming the results
of Bard and Aylett (1999), as well as in addition to shortening by higher contextual predictabilities. Our results indicate that function words are not generally affected by
repetition, and that shorter second mentions are at least
mainly associated with content words, and not just with
nouns, but with verbs, adverbs, and adjectives as well, consistent with the results of Pluymaekers et al. (2005a). Since
Fowler (1988) failed to ﬁnd repetition effects for form repetition alone (homonyms, lists, etc.) without any informational status difference, this would indicate that either
verbs, adverbs, and modiﬁers are often tied to a system
of informational status in some way, or else that there is
instead (or, more likely, in addition), an effect of lemma
repetition on lexical access.
Does the effect apply to mentions subsequent to the
second? At least not substantially, given our results. But
the shortening effect is small, so that further shortening
by repeated repetitions might well not be detected. This
question is related to the roles of informational status
and lemma repetition. If given status is the source of repetition reduction, further use of the word would not change
its status, so subsequent mentions should not receive additional shortening. Cumulative effects from multiple repetition are more consistent with a repeated-lemma source.
Further research is needed to clarify these issues.

105

The results conform to the general principle that word
forms have reduced pronunciations when they are more
frequent or predictable, the Probabilistic Reduction
Hypothesis. But how is this principled variation achieved
in speech production? We address this question in the following sections, to the extent that our results are relevant.
The relationship between lexical access and articulatory
form is taken up in ‘‘Lexical access, word frequency, and
articulation”. This connection is motivated by the pattern
of word-frequency effects on duration. A mechanism linking access and form is proposed, based on temporal coordination between the articulatory stream and the planning of
utterances at higher levels. ‘‘Multiple sources for contextual-predictability reduction” considers the possible production sources of the effects of previous and following
predictability on duration, concluding that there are
sources of these effects at all levels of speech production
planning and execution. ‘‘Probabilistic reduction and cognitive models of speech production” describes the consequences for certain claims about production models,
especially the issues about the differential processing of
content and function words. We argue here that our results
support models in which function words have a special
mode or modes of access, and in which the access of content words is sensitive to their activation levels, such as
the model proposed by Lapointe and Dell (1989). Interestingly, it is the greater sensitivity of content words to frequency that most strongly supports the differential
processing of content and function words, and not the ﬁnding that function words have shorter relative articulatory
realizations than do content words.
Lexical access, word frequency, and articulation
Lexical access is a likely source of the word-frequency effects on articulation summarized above. There are two compelling reasons for this. One is that more frequent words are
known to be accessed faster; this is generally attributed to
their higher activation (e.g. Grifﬁn & Bock, 1998 and references therein). Another reason follows from our ﬁnding that
it is content words that are more reduced if they are more
frequent, not function words. This suggests a source at the
level of lexical access, where the distinction between content and function words is readily available. But for lexical
access to be a source for the word-frequency effects on articulation, as we mentioned in the introduction, there must be
a production mechanism that associates a word’s lexical
activation with its strength and rate of articulation.
We propose that this association is implemented by a
short-term coordination that moderates the pace of articulation when the progress of phonological encoding is slowed. A general motivation for a mechanism like this
comes from the need for the production system to maintain temporal coordination between the conceptual/lexical
and articulatory temporal streams of speech. More speciﬁc
support comes from four patterns of probabilistic reduction found here: a word-frequency effect in addition to
predictability effects, word frequency affecting content
words but not function words, the stronger effect of frequency at higher word frequencies, and the lack of an effect of repetition for function words.

106

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

The rate at which constructions are assembled and their
associated words are accessed and incorporated into a
phonologically encoded string is limited by factors such
as syntactic complexity and the lexical activation levels
of the words and their competitors. The rate at which the
articulatory plan is created and executed, on the other
hand, is mainly limited by the number and complexity of
syllables. It is thus necessary that there be means of maintaining synchrony between planning and articulation. Two
mechanisms that help coordinate the two levels are wellknown. One is speakers’ control of explicitness and rate
in different styles of speech, including listener inﬂuences.
The other is the appearance of disﬂuencies (pauses, ﬁlled
pauses, and repetitions, which are also accompanied by
longer and fuller articulations) when coordination breaks
down.
Our proposal is that there is also a mechanism of ﬂuent
speech that helps coordinate lexical access and/or phonological encoding and the execution of the articulatory plan.
This would come into play when the speciﬁcation of the
current prosodic unit, most likely the phonological word
(Levelt, 1992; Wheeldon & Lahiri, 1997), is slowed, but
not so severely to require disﬂuent adaptations. In order
to maintain coordination of the ﬂow on the two levels,
the subsequent phasing and/or strength of the gestural
articulation of this unit would then be modiﬁed slightly,
so that it is executed with a longer duration. (Since the
phonological unit is provided to the articulator, it is this
unit that is affected, not the previous one, which is presumably already underway. In models of availability-based
production (Ferreira & Dell, 2000; Frank & Jaeger, 2008), on
the other hand, a unit is so slowly constructed that it is not
available to the articulation in time, and it is the previous
stretch of speech where slowing, pausing, etc., takes place
to wait for it). There is thus a continuum from fully ﬂuent
and rapid speech, through ﬂuent speech that is locally slowed, to the lengthened pronunciations that are part of the
disﬂuency adaptations to incomplete plans that feed into
phonetic and articulatory coding. If the base articulation
strength is set by long-term accommodations to the conversational context, then the short-term coordination
may be thought of as a lengthening mechanism, which
shows up in our data as longer pronunciations for less frequent words. This need not imply a direct link between a
word’s frequency, its access time, and adjustments to phonetic form or articulation rate. Word frequency is not the
only factor affecting lexical access time, lexical access time
is not the only factor affecting phonological and prosodic
encoding, and slower access may not always lead to longer
planning times. To accord with the observed lengthened
durations for lower-frequency words, it is only necessary
that slowed speech plans be more frequent for lower-frequency words than for higher-frequency ones.
Lexical access as the locus of word-frequency effects is
supported by the lack of a word-frequency effect for function words: at this level, conceptual and functional differences between content and function words can govern
different modes of access. The lack of a frequency effect
for function words implies that function words are not
usually subject to slow enough access to require accommodation by the articulatory plan, or else that their access

does not vary much with respect to frequency. This is not
likely to be simply a consequence of the overall higher frequency of function words, since for content words the frequency effect appears to be stronger, at least not weaker,
for higher-frequency words. Moreover, if frequency were
to affect lower levels of segmental and prosodic organization directly, there is no simple way to exempt forms derived from function words. Thus the lack of a frequency
effect supports a different mode of usual access for most
function words, an issue we return to below in ‘‘Probabilistic reduction and cognitive models of speech production”.
Further support for a coordination link between access
and phonological encoding and the pace of articulation
comes from the ﬁnding that reduction effects are diminished for less frequent and/or less predictable content
words. The diminution of the frequency effect that Grifﬁn
and Bock (1998) found (for more predictable words) arises
from smaller contextual facilitation for higher-frequency
words, which are already highly activated, than for less frequent ones. The effect found here cannot come from some
sort of similar limitation on the amount of reduction from
frequency and/or predictability, either at the lexical level
or lower, since it is the less frequent words which undergo
less reduction. Nor can the scarcity of collocations among
less frequent and less predictable words be more than a
minor source of less reduction for these words. Rather, it
looks like a ceiling effect in the opposite direction, on
lengthening and strengthening, rather than on reduction.
In ﬂuent speech, the local slowing of articulation to accommodate higher-level delays would be capped at the lower
frequencies and lower predictabilities associated with
problems that trigger a disﬂuency. This limitation on ﬂuent
coordination would be consistent with the weakening of
the frequency effect for low-frequency content words.
There may be other sources for the weakening of the effect,
of course. One possibility yet to be explored is that various
reduction processes may differ in their sensitivity to frequency and predictability, and that the contexts conducive
to the more sensitive ones occur more often in frequent
words. On the other hand, reduced frequency effects at
lower frequencies are not compatible with a listener-oriented explanation such as selecting certain low-frequency
words perhaps unfamiliar to the listener for more explicit
pronunciation.
The characteristics of repeated-word reduction also accord with the lexical access and coordination mechanism,
whether the source is from repeated-lemma access or from
given status. Once a word is accessed, either in production
or comprehension, its activation level is increased at the
conceptual or lemma level. This would facilitate the retrieval of the word’s form in subsequent uses. The link with reduced forms would come from the coordination of the
progress in planning and the execution of the articulatory
plan. The lack of reduction in repeated function words
would follow from the restriction on activation-related access to content words. The alternative to priming by lemma access is the proposal of Bard et al. (2000) that the
source of repetition reduction comes from given status
increasing the lemma activation of second and subsequent
mentions. The association with reduced forms would again
come from the coordination mechanism. A given-status

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

source of course also accounts for the content–function
word difference, by stipulating that function words do
not participate in the pragmatic system of new-given status. Note that the restriction of repetition reduction to contexts requiring phrasal planning follows from either
lemma priming or given status, if their effects are achieved
via a planning-articulation link.
Since the proposed coordination mechanism would normally only come into play for spontaneous connected
speech, it would help explain the paucity of duration effects
in studies of lexical access in tasks like picture naming. The
conclusion that lexical access is the locus of word-frequency
and repetition effects on production suggests an important
link to comprehension. Models of frequency and predictability effects on lexical comprehension dating back to Morton
(1969) or Forster and Chambers (1973) have placed the locus of these effects in the lexical access process. Our results
thus provide evidence for shared or at least similar processes
of lexical access in comprehension and production.
Multiple sources for contextual-predictability reduction
Next we consider the sources of the shorter durations
associated with greater contextual predictability. We ﬁnd
that there are potential sources of contextual-predictability effects at all stages of the planning and execution of
utterances. For some of them, there is empirical evidence
from previous research; support for others is more indirect
and speculative. We argue that no one of the sources alone
can account for the observed pattern of effects, and conclude that durational differences attributable to contextual
predictability have multiple sources in speech production.
The different sensitivities of word classes to previous and
to following conditional probability are a further issue.
Extrapolating from some particular cases, we suggest that
reasons for directional differences in predictability sensitivity may lie in differences in the form and structural combination of words and word classes.
Predictability effects may originate before the level of
lexical access. Gahl and Garnsey (2004) and Gahl, Garnsey,
Fisher, and Matzen (2006) showed that predictability from
syntactic constructions affected word durations in read
sentences. In our analyses, predictability from neighboring
words is not distinguished from predictability from syntactic constructions. So some unknown, but probably small,
portion of contextual reduction found here may be associated with the interaction of syntactic planning and the
subsequent activation and retrieval of words from the lexicon. In addition to syntactic sources of predictability, if
contextually more predictable lemmas are more strongly
activated by preceding or following words, similarly to
the effects found by Grifﬁn and Bock (1998), then their
forms will be accessed more quickly. Raised activation levels from either syntactic predictability or lemma association could then inﬂuence articulations via the
coordination mechanism described in the previous section.
Such sources are not likely to be major contributions to
contextual-predictability effects, for two reasons. First,
they are second-order effects, modifying lexical frequency
effects, whereas following contextual predictability affects
durations in our results as strongly as or more strongly

107

than frequency. Second, these sources should only apply
to content words, given the assumption that their articulation, but not that of function words, is sensitive to frequency. If their contribution were large, we should have
found some indication that content words are subject to
greater predictability effects.
Other sources of contextual-predictability reduction
can be loosely characterized as collocational, in the sense
of words being more or less closely associated. This can occur at several levels: at the lexical level, at the level of the
phonological encoding of prosody, and at the articulatory
level.
At the lexical level, lexicalized compounds and other
lexicalized collocations increased the contextual effects
found in our analyses, to the extent that their components
were entered as separate orthographic words by the
Switchboard coding. For items whose lexical status is in little doubt, like ice cream or blue jeans, this is just an artifact
of this particular data and its analysis. But there are likely
many items whose lexical status varies from person to
person, or which may even be in transition, accessible
either as a lexical unit or via its component words. It is
plausible for this class of collocations that those with
higher contextual predictabilities will also be more likely
to be accessed as units. Assuming that access of units is usually quicker than access of components, they will be less
often subject to slowing by coordination accommodation.
The investigation of collocations of content words indicated
that lexical collocations are not a major contribution to following conditional-probability effects for content words.
This is what one would expect if such collocations are largely limited to higher probabilities. For function words,
especially the high-frequency function words, lexical collocations may affect durations more strongly. This issue is addressed below in the discussion on the different sensitivities
of word classes to contextual-predictability effects.
At the level of phonological encoding, prosody is another potential source of predictability reduction. Predictable collocations, even if not accessed as a lexical unit,
will be more likely to be encoded as single prosodic words
rather than separate ones, which should usually result in
shorter pronunciations. And if predictable sequences are
more likely to occur within prosodic phrases and intonational phrases rather than across them, or in longer
phrases, then their articulations will in some instances be
more reduced than less predictable sequences. This would
follow from their not being subject to initial or ﬁnal lengthening or by the shortening of units within larger domains
(Fougeron & Keating, 1997). This hypothesis of course
needs empirical validation, which is beyond the scope of
this study. We did examine whether some necessary preconditions for this mechanism exist at the level of the intonational phrase, since words in the dataset were coded for
length of the intonational phrase (IP) containing them. Indeed, IP length and following conditional probability are
signiﬁcantly correlated with duration in the appropriate
directions. Further, for the content-word sample excluding
high-frequency homonyms (and also excluding kind of and
lot of), IP length is a signiﬁcant additional factor
(F(1, 1205) = 6.3, p = .01), and reduces the contribution of
following conditional probability.

108

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

At the articulatory level, certain frequent word sequences may have stored articulatory plans, automatized
by repetition, as suggested by Bybee and Hopper (2001)
and Bybee and McClelland (2005). Presumably the contribution of this mechanism to contextual-predictability
reduction would be limited to higher-frequency words.
Moreover, it cannot be a dominant source, since if very frequent repetition were the source of such plans, joint contextual probability would have been a stronger factor.
In addition to these collocational and prosodic mechanisms, a direct inﬂuence of predictability on lower levels
cannot be ruled out, although it suffers the disadvantage
of a lack of independent motivation. Biasing of the selection of phonetic exemplars, as proposed by Pierrehumbert
(2002), is perhaps one mechanism that could link contextual predictability directly to articulatory realization. Direct-inﬂuence models are discussed further in the next
section.
So far we have not addressed the different sensitivities
of content and function words to predictability from neighboring words, especially predictability from the previous
word. Why should function words with higher previous
conditional probability be shorter, but not content words?
First of all, differences in contextual predictability are not
just content–function differences. It is not the case that
all function words have shorter pronunciations when they
are more predictable from the previous context; it is just
the most frequent function words. This is only an indication of differences that likely extends to much smaller classes of words. Among the 10 most frequent function words,
Bell et al. (2003) found that some are sensitive both to previous conditional probability and to following conditional
probability (the, to, it). Some are sensitive only to following
conditional probability (a, in, that, you). And I and and are
sensitive only to previous conditional probability. Function
words of course have different dependencies with surrounding structures and this can affect the way their forms
are accessed (Alario & Caramazza, 2002; Eberhard, Cutting,
& Bock, 2005). Whether this might be related to the differences found here is unknown. Different effects of predictability probably also exist for less frequent function
words and content words. (See, for example, the differences found by Pluymaekers et al. (2005a) for seven Dutch
adjective/adverbs.) If so, one must conclude that differences in the direction of predictability sensitivity reﬂect
the fact that words or classes of words typically occur in
different kinds of constructions. A particularly striking instance of a construction-speciﬁc effect is given by and,
one of the few words to be sensitive to the bilateral conditional probability given both previous and following
words. It occurs frequently as a marker of binomial constructions such as now and then, mom and dad. And is pronounced shorter in binomial constructions than elsewhere,
and in binomials, it is shorter when more predictable from
both the surrounding words (Bell et al., 2003). Even though
no overall signiﬁcant contribution from bilateral conditional probability was found in the present data, certain
other words are likely to be affected if they occur in similar
constructions; an obvious candidate is the disjunction or.
From this perspective, the patterns of sensitivity to
measures of contextual predictability displayed in Table

10 stem from preponderances of certain kinds of forms
among very frequent function words, other function
words, and content words, and from the structures they
typically occur in. Elucidating the reasons for the differences will require more detailed word and class analysis,
combined with more detailed and speciﬁc measures of
reduction than the global one of duration employed here.
Some factors that could contribute to the different patterns
come to mind. For frequent words and combinations, the
inﬂuence of possible lexicalized collocations with previous
or following words is an obvious candidate. Form differences are another. As pointed out earlier, very frequent
function words are monosyllabic and have frequent reduced alternate forms. They often include alternate forms
lacking onsets for the words with obstruent onsets (the,
that, to). This makes them vulnerable to reduction when
closely associated with previous words, and some of them
at least do occur in constructions with such associations.
Resulting reduced forms suggest an earlier stage along
the path that has produced lexicalized cliticizations of is,
have, not, etc. Content words, on the other hand, generally
contain at least one full or stressed syllable, which in English is most frequently the ﬁrst syllable (Cutler & Carter,
1987). The lack of an effect of previous conditional probability for content words might reﬂect a relatively lower
incidence of close association with preceding words. Even
if it does not, the ends of content words are more vulnerable to reduction than their onsets, so that shortening is
more likely in cases of close association with following
words. Other explanations for the predominance of following predictability involving the time course of planning,
such as the tentative ‘‘involvement-in-planning” suggestion of Pluymaekers et al. (2005a), are yet to be considered.
Probabilistic reduction and cognitive models of speech
production
Our results add further support to the different modes
of lexical access of content and function words proposed
by Garrett (1975) and Lapointe and Dell (1989). (See also
the proposal of Gordon and Dell (2003) that lexical activation of heavy verbs depends mainly on semantic cues
whereas activation of light verbs (e.g. go, do) depends more
on syntactic cues, which could be extended to content–
function differences.) Models like that of Stemberger
(1985), in which content and function words alike are accessed by network activation, are not compatible with
the strong effect of frequency on the duration of content
words, and the lack of one for function words. Nor are they
compatible with the restriction of repetition reduction to
content words. There are undoubted differences between
content and function words in form and function, of
course, which Stemberger invokes to explain the speech
error and aphasia motivations for their differential access.
These differences, however, some of which are noted above
in the preceding section and in the following paragraph,
are generally of the sort that would lead to greater reduction of higher-frequency function words, not less. They
also have no apparent connection with repetition. It is thus
difﬁcult to see how they could account for different sensitivities to frequency and repetition of content and function

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

words. Note, however, that nothing about the effects of
probabilistic reduction addresses the different ways that
function words are accessed in the models of Garrett (prespeciﬁcation in syntactic templates) and of Lapointe and
Dell (access by a feature-lookup procedure).
The shorter articulations of function words compared to
content words of equivalent frequency and predictability
also appears to support a different mode of access of content
and function words. This difference is compatible with differential access, but it does not provide strong support for
it, mainly because here the representational, form, and
structural differences of function words do provide a plausible alternative sources of the duration differences. (Differential access also would not account for the articulatory
duration differences between the high-frequency function
words and the rest.) One such source is that function words
have common alternative reduced forms. Alternative lexical
forms are usually assumed for a few words like the (ði$ðE)
, but they probably exist for many others. For
and a
example, a and of are mostly pronounced E, E/Ev, and in faster speech almost always so. Content words containing the
lexical segments and A such as day, say, lot, rob, etc., have
no such alternants. This is particularly characteristic of the
high-frequency function words, but occurs with others as
well, e.g. because, unless, if, between. This would allow contextual choices among forms of varying degrees of fullness
and/or reduction at the level of lexical selection. In analyses
such as this one, in which control of form is based on assumed single lexical representations, to the extent that
function words overall have more reduced variants, they
will end up with shorter relative pronunciations than content words. Note that this need not presume that no content
words have such variants; some do, e.g. regular, probably,
hundred. Nor does it presume that content words in general
cannot sometimes be highly reduced, as for example in the
pronunciation of think in our corpus cited earlier. (See Johnson, 2004, for an extended discussion of reduction of content
words.) Another contributing factor may be the high proportion of function words which have monosyllabic, unstressed, and often reduced forms. (‘‘Reduced” is used here
in the speciﬁc sense of not being a full syllable, like the second syllable of pinnacle versus that of pinochle). Length variation, especially that involving vowel reduction and the
deletion of onsets, vowels, and codas, is found more often
in unstressed syllables. Unstressed syllables may encompass the entirety of many function words, but are usually
lacking in monosyllabic content words, and only a part of
longer ones. Thus any shortening effects would be relatively
greater for function words.
What are the consequences of the present results for
cognitive production models that account for probabilistic
reduction by a direct inﬂuence of frequency and predictability on articulation? To the extent that such proposals
only assert that there must be some connection between
words’ frequency and predictability and their articulatory
realization, they obviously accord with our conclusions.
If, however, the claim is that some representation of the
frequency and predictability of words is passed through
(or in parallel to) the levels of lexical access and sequencing and of phonological encoding to the phonetic and
articulatory levels, then there are some potential

109

contradictions. The application of frequency and of predictability together at the same level (e.g. the ‘‘simultaneous” application of Pluymaekers et al., 2005a) is at
odds with frequency (and repetition) affecting content
words but following conditional probability affecting function words as well as content words. Even if separate
parameters for frequency and predictability are assumed,
a motivated mechanism is lacking that could distinguish
content and function words at a level which most models
presume to be composed of entities close to articulatory
forms. Another possible mechanism for a direct-inﬂuence
model is that word frequencies and predictabilities are in
fact reﬂections of the frequencies and sequential predictabilities of articulatory units, perhaps syllables, syllable-like
units, or in some cases short syllable sequences. Then perhaps the higher activation and more rapid access of the
more frequent and more predictable units would lead to
weaker and shorter articulations. If this were the case,
however, one would expect that there would be ceiling effects that would reduce probabilistic effects at higher frequencies and predictabilities. This is the opposite of the
effect that was actually found.
Another class of alternative explanations is provided by
the accommodation of speakers to the needs of their audience, whereby more redundant elements, being more
retrievable from context, are allowed to be less fully articulated (e.g. Lindblom, 1990). Speakers certainly adjust
their speech to suit different audiences and situations in
multiple ways, including choices of explicit or elliptical
forms, slower or faster rates of speech, and reduced or full
pronunciations. Bard et al. (2000) point out that these
adjustments are computationally complex, given the demands of speech production planning, so they take place
slowly and imperfectly. Hence they may not be not good
candidates for the source of the local and rapid form variations characteristic of probabilistic reduction. In any case,
more details are needed about the nature of audience-oriented mechanisms and their place in the production process in order to assess whether they can account for the
patterns of probabilistic reduction that were found here.
In particular, it would appear intuitively that predictability
from the previous word would be a much more prominent
factor if the audience’s needs were paramount.
Finally, it is possible to recast probabilistic reduction in
terms of redundancy or informativeness, and to presume
that the production process is governed by smoothing
mechanisms that ensure the even distribution of informativeness over the time course of speech (Aylett, 1999; Levy
& Jaeger, 2007; Van Son et al., 1998). These may be just different ways of characterizing the same phenomenon. If
they are truly different, then the mechanisms proposed
here provide a basis for comparison with possibly distinct
redundancy-smoothing mechanisms.
We conclude that four general hypotheses about the
sources of probabilistic reduction in speech production follow from the patterns of association of form duration with
measures of frequency and predictability:
 Longer durations for less frequent content words have
their main source in their lower lexical activation levels,
which lead to slower retrieval from the lexicon.

110

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111

 Function words have a privileged means of access.
 Shorter durations for more contextually predictable
words have multiple sources, including those related
to lexical activation and to the grouping of words at
the lexical and prosodic levels.
 The reduction of second mentions stems from an augmentation of the lexical activation level of a word.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially supported by the NSF, via
awards IIS-9733067, IIS-9978025, and IIS-0624345, and
by the Edinburgh Stanford Link. Many thanks to Ayako Ikeno, Bill Raymond, Eric Fosler-Lussier, and Dan Gildea for
their important contributions to the compilation of the
database and to Mirjam Ernestus, Susanne Gahl, Florian
Jaeger, Rebecca Scarborough, and reviewers for many helpful suggestions. We are also very grateful to Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel and Mari Ostendorf for generously taking
the time and effort to release to us a preliminary version
of their prosodically coded portion of Switchboard.
References
Alario, F.-X., & Caramazza, A. (2002). The production of determiners:
Evidence from French. Cognition, 82, 179–223.
Aylett, M. P. (1999). Stochastic suprasegmentals: Relationships between
redundancy, prosodic structure and syllabic duration. In Proceedings
of the 1999 international conference on spoken language processing (pp.
289–292).
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy hypothesis: A
functional explanation for relationships between redundancy,
prosodic prominence, and duration in spontaneous speech.
Language and Speech, 47, 31–56.
Aylett, M., & Turk, A. (2006). Language redundancy predicts syllable
duration and the spectral characteristics of vocalic syllable nuclei.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 119, 3048–3058.
Balota, D. A., Boland, J. E., & Shields, L. W. (1989). Priming in
pronunciation: Beyond pattern recognition and onset latency.
Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 14–36.
Bard, E. G. & Aylett, M. P. (1999). The disassociation of deaccenting,
givenness, and syntactic role in spontaneous speech. In Proceedings of
the 1999 international conference on spoken language processing (pp.
1753–1756).
Bard, E. G., Anderson, A. H., Sotillo, C., Aylett, M., Doherty-Sneddon,
G., & Newlands, A. (2000). Controlling the intelligibility of
referring expressions in dialogue. Journal of Memory and
Language, 42, 1–22.
Bell, A., Jurafsky, D., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C., Gregory, M., & Gildea, D.
(2003). Effects of disﬂuencies, predictability, and utterance position
on word form variation in English conversation. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 113, 1001–1024.
Bock, K. (1989). Closed-class immanence in sentence production.
Cognition, 31, 163–186.
Bock, K., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1994). Language production: Grammatical
encoding. In M. A. Gernsbacher (Ed.), Handbook of psycholinguistics
(pp. 945–984). New York: Academic Press.
Brill, F. (1995). Transformation-based error-driven learning and natural
language processing: A case study in part-of-speech tagging.
Computational Linguistics, 21, 543–566.
Browman, C., & Goldstein, L. (1990). Tiers in articulatory phonology, with
some implications for casual speech. In J. Kingston & M. E. Beckman
(Eds.), Papers in laboratory phonology. I: Between the grammar and
physics of speech (pp. 341–376). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Bush, N. (2001). Frequency effects and word-boundary palatalization in
English. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of
linguistic structure (pp. 255–280). Amsterdam: Benjamin.
Bybee, J. L. (2000). The phonology of the lexicon: Evidence from lexical
diffusion. In M. Barlow & S. Kemmer (Eds.), Usage-based models of
language (pp. 65–85). Stanford, CA: CSLI.

Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (2001). Introduction to frequency and emergence of
linguistic structure. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the
emergence of linguistic structure (pp. 1–24). Amsterdam: Benjamin.
Bybee, J., & McClelland, J. L. (2005). Alternatives to the combinatorial
paradigm of linguistic theory based on domain general principles of
human cognition. The Linguistic Review, 22, 381–410.
Bybee, J., & Scheibman, J. (1999). The effect of usage on degrees of
constituency: The reduction of don’t in English. Linguistics, 37,
575–596.
Caramazza, A., & Berndt, R. S. (1985). A multicomponent deﬁcit view of
agrammatic Broca’s aphasia. In M.-L. Kean (Ed.), Agrammatism
(pp. 27–63). Orlando: Academic Press.
Cutler, A., & Carter, D. (1987). The predominance of strong initial syllables
in the English vocabulary. Computer Speech and Language, 2, 133–142.
Damian, M. F. (2003). Articulatory duration in single-word speech
production. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29, 416–431.
Dell, G. S. (1990). Effects of frequency and vocabulary type on
phonological speech errors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 5,
313–349.
Dell, G. S., & O’Seaghdha, P. G. (1992). Stages of lexical access in language
production. Cognition, 42, 287–314.
Eberhard, K. M., Cutting, J. C., & Bock, K. (2005). Making syntax of sense:
Number agreement in sentence production. Psychological Review, 112,
531–559.
Ferreira, V. S., & Dell, G. S. (2000). Effect of ambiguity and lexical
availability on syntactic and lexical production. Cognitive Psychology,
40, 296–340.
Fidelholz, J. (1975). Word frequency and vowel reduction in English.
Chicago Linguistic Society, 11, 200–213.
Forster, K., & Chambers, S. (1973). Lexical access and naming time. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12, 627–635.
Fosler-Lussier, E., & Morgan, N. (1999). Effects of speaking rate and word
predictability
on
conversational
pronunciations.
Speech
Communication, 29, 137–158.
Fougeron, C., & Keating, P. A. (1997). Articulatory strengthening at edges
of prosodic domains. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 101,
3728–3740.
Fowler, C. (1988). Differential shortening of repeated content words
produced in various communicative contexts. Language and Speech,
31, 307–319.
Fowler, C. A., & Housum, J. (1987). Talkers’ signaling of ‘‘new” and ‘‘old”
words in speech and listeners’ perception and use of the distinction.
Journal of Memory and Language, 26, 489–504.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Clark, H. H. (1997). Pronouncing ‘‘the” as ‘‘thee” to signal
problems in speaking. Cognition, 62, 151–167.
Frank, A. F. & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform
information density as an optimal strategy for language production.
In Proceedings of the 30th annual conference of the cognitive science
society (pp. 933–938).
Gahl, S., Garnsey, S. M., Fisher, C., & Matzen, L. (2006). ‘‘That sounds
unlikely”: Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation. In Proceedings
of the 28th annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1334–
1339).
Gahl, S., & Garnsey, S. M. (2004). Knowledge of grammar, knowledge of
usage: Syntactic probabilities affect pronunciation variation.
Language, 80, 748–775.
Garrett, M. F. (1975). The analysis of sentence production. In G. H. Bower
(Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research
and theory (Vol. 9, pp. 133–177). London: Academic Press.
Garrett, M. F. (1980). Levels of processing in sentence production. In G. H.
Bower (Ed.), Language production (Vol. 1, pp. 177–220). London:
Academic Press.
Godfrey, J., Holliman, E., & McDaniel, J. (1992). SWITCHBOARD: Telephone
speech corpus for research and development. In Proceedings of the
IEEE ICASSP-92 (pp. 517–520). San Francisco: IEEE.
Goodglass, H., & Menn, L. (1985). Is agrammatism a unitary phenomenon?
In M.-L. Kean (Ed.), Agrammatism (pp. 1–26). Orlando: Academic
Press.
Gordon, B., & Caramazza, A. (1982). Lexical decisions for open and closed
class words: Failure to replicate differential frequency sensitivity.
Brain and Language, 15, 143–160.
Gordon, J. K., & Dell, G. S. (2003). Learning to divide the labor: An account
of deﬁcits in light and heavy verb production. Cognitive Science, 27,
1–40.
Greenberg, S., Ellis, D., & Hollenback, J. (1996). Insights into spoken
language gleaned from phonetic transcription of the Switchboard
corpus. In Proceedings of the 1996 international conference on spoken
language processing (pp. 24–27).

A. Bell et al. / Journal of Memory and Language 60 (2009) 92–111
Gregory, M. L., Raymond, W. D., Bell, A., Fosler-Lussier, E., & Jurafsky, D.
(1999). The effects of collocational strength and contextual
predictability in lexical production. Chicago Linguistic Society, 35,
151–166.
Grifﬁn, Z. M., & Bock, K. (1998). Constraint, word frequency, and the
relationship between lexical processing levels in spoken word
production. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 313–338.
Hawkins, S., & Warren, P. (1994). Implications for lexical access of
phonetic inﬂuences on the intelligibility of conversational speech.
Journal of Phonetics, 22, 493–511.
Herron, D. T., & Bates, E. A. (1997). Sentential and acoustic factors in the
recognition of open- and closed-class words. Journal of Memory and
Language, 37, 217–239.
Hocking, R. R. (2003). Methods and applications of linear models: Regression
and the analysis of variance (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Hooper, J. B. (1976). Word frequency in lexical diffusion and the source of
morphophonological change. In W. Christie (Ed.), Current progress in
historical linguistics (pp. 96–105). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Jespersen, O. (1924/1965). The philosophy of grammar. New York: W.W.
Norton.
Johnson, K. (2004). Massive reduction in conversational American English.
In K. Yoneyama & K. Maekawa (Eds.), Proceedings of the ﬁrst session of
the 10th international symposium on spontaneous speech: Data and
analysis (pp. 29–54). Tokyo: The National International Institute for
Japanese Language.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D. (2001). Probabilistic
relations between words: Evidence from reduction in lexical
production. In J. Bybee & P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the
emergence of linguistic structure (pp. 229–254). Amsterdam: Benjamin.
Kello, C. T., & Plaut, D. C. (2000). Strategic control in word reading:
Evidence from speeded responding in the tempo-naming task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26,
719–750.
Krug, M. (1998). String frequency: A cognitive motivating factor in
coalescence, language processing, and linguistic change. Journal of
English Linguistics, 26, 286–320.
Lapointe, S. G., & Dell, G. S. (1989). A synthesis of some recent work in
sentence production. In G. N. Carlson & M. K. Tanenhaus (Eds.),
Linguistic structure in language processing (pp. 107–156). Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Lehiste, I. (1970). Suprasegmentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Leslau, W. (1969). Frequency as determinant of linguistic change in the
Ethiopian languages. Word, 25, 180–189.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1992). Accessing words in speech production: Stages,
processes, and representations. Cognition, 42, 1–22.
Levelt, W. J. M. (2002). Phonological encoding in speech production:
Comments on Jurafsky et al., Schiller et al., and van Heuven & Haan. In
C. Gussenhoven & N. Warner (Eds.), Laboratory phonology 7
(pp. 87–99). Berlin/New York: Mouton.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of lexical access
in speech production. Behavioral and Brain Science, 22, 1–75.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize information density
through syntactic reduction. In B. Schölkopf, J. Platt, & T. Hoffman
(Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems
(pp. 849–856). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lieberman, P. (1963). Some effects of the semantic and grammatical
context on the production and perception of speech. Language and
Speech, 6, 172–175.
Lindblom, B. (1990). Explaining phonetic variation: A sketch of the H&H
theory. In W. Hardcastle & A. Marchal (Eds.), Speech production and
speech modeling (pp. 403–439). Dordrecht: Kluwer.

111

Liu, H., Bates, E., Powell, T., & Wulfeck, B. (1997). Single-word shadowing
and the study of lexical access. Applied Psycholinguistics, 18, 157–180.
MacWhinney, B. (2001). Emergentist approaches to language. In J. Bybee
& P. Hopper (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic structure
(pp. 449–470). Amsterdam: Benjamin.
Manning, C., & Schütze, H. (1999). Collocations. Foundations of statistical
natural language processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Morton, J. (1969). Interaction of information in word recognition.
Psychological Review, 76, 165–178.
Munson, B. (2007). Lexical access, lexical representation, and vowel
production. In J. S. Cole & J. I. Hualde (Eds.), Laboratory phonology 9
(pp. 201–228). Berlin/New York: Mouton.
Oldﬁeld, R. C., & Wingﬁeld, A. (1965). Response latencies in naming
objects. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 17, 273–281.
O’Shaughnessy, D. (1992). Automatic recognition of hesitations in
spontaneous speech. In ICASSP-92. Vol. 1 (pp. 593–596). New York:
IEEE.
Ostendorf, M., Shafran, I., Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., Byrne, B., & Carmichael, L.
(2001). A prosodically labeled database of spontaneous speech. In
Proceedings of the ISCA workshop on prosody in speech recognition and
understanding (pp. 119–121).
Pierrehumbert, J. B. (2002). Word-speciﬁc phonetics. In C. Gussenhoven &
N. Warner (Eds.), Laboratory phonology 7 (pp. 101–139). Berlin/New
York: Mouton.
Pluymaekers, M., Ernestus, M., & Baayen, R. H. (2005a). Articulatory
planning is continuous and sensitive to informational redundancy.
Phonetica, 62, 146–159.
Pluymaekers, M., Ernestus, M., & Baayen, R. H. (2005b). Lexical frequency
and acoustic reduction in spoken Dutch. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 118, 2561–2569.
Rhodes, R. A. (1992). Flapping in American English. In Proceedings of the
seventh international phonology meeting (pp. 217–232). Turin:
Rosenberg and Sellier.
Rhodes, R. A. (1996). English reduced vowels and the nature of natural
processes. In B. Hurch & R. A. Rhodes (Eds.), Natural phonology: The
state of the art (pp. 239–259). The Hague: Mouton.
Schuchardt, H. (1885). Über die Lautgesetze: Gegen die Jungrammatiker.
Berlin: Robert Oppenheim (Excerpted with English translation. In
Vennemann, T. & Wilbur, T. H. (Eds.). (1972). Schuchardt, the
Neogrammarians, and the transformational theory of phonological
change (pp. 1–72). Frankfurt: Athenaum Verlag).
Segalowitz, S. J., & Lane, K. C. (2000). Lexical access of function versus
content words. Brain and Language, 75, 376–389.
Shattuck-Hufnagel, S. (1992). The role of word structure in segmental
serial ordering. Cognition, 42, 213–259.
Shriberg, E. (1995). Acoustic properties of disﬂuent repetitions. In
Proceedings of the international congress of phonetic sciences (ICPhS95) (Vol. 4, pp. 384–387). Stockholm: Stockholm University.
Stemberger, J. P. (1985). An interactive activation model of language
production. In A. Ellis (Ed.), Progress in the psychology of language
(pp. 143–186). London: Erlbaum.
Taylor, P. (2000). Analysis and synthesis of intonation using the Tilt
model. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 107, 1697–1714.
Van Son, R. J. J. H., Koopmans-van Beinum, F. J., & Pols, L. C. W. (1998).
Efﬁciency as an organizing principle of natural speech. In Proceedings
of the 1998 international conference on spoken language processing (pp.
2395–2398).
Wheeldon, L., & Lahiri, A. (1997). Prosodic units in speech production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 356–381.
Zipf, G. K. (1929). Relative frequency as a determinant of phonetic change.
Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 15, 1–95.

