Effects of disﬂuencies, predictability, and utterance position
on word form variation in English conversation
Alan Bell and Daniel Jurafsky
Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0925

Eric Fosler-Lussier
Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies

Cynthia Girand
Department of Linguistics, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0925

Michelle Gregory
Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island

Daniel Gildea
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

͑Received 21 May 2001; revised 18 October 2002; accepted 5 November 2002͒
Function words, especially frequently occurring ones such as ͑the, that, and, and of ͒, vary widely
in pronunciation. Understanding this variation is essential both for cognitive modeling of lexical
production and for computer speech recognition and synthesis. This study investigates which factors
affect the forms of function words, especially whether they have a fuller pronunciation ͑e.g., Z{,
Z,#, ,'$, #3͒ or a more reduced or lenited pronunciation ͑e.g., Z., Z&t, n, .͒. It is based on over
8000 occurrences of the ten most frequent English function words in a 4-h sample from
conversations from the Switchboard corpus. Ordinary linear and logistic regression models were
used to examine variation in the length of the words, in the form of their vowel ͑basic, full, or
reduced͒, and whether ﬁnal obstruents were present or not. For all these measures, after controlling
for segmental context, rate of speech, and other important factors, there are strong independent
effects that made high-frequency monosyllabic function words more likely to be longer or have a
fuller form ͑1͒ when neighboring disﬂuencies ͑such as ﬁlled pauses uh and um͒ indicate that the
speaker was encountering problems in planning the utterance; ͑2͒ when the word is unexpected, i.e.,
less predictable in context; ͑3͒ when the word is either utterance initial or utterance ﬁnal. Looking
at the phenomenon in a different way, frequent function words are more likely to be shorter and to
have less-full forms in ﬂuent speech, in predictable positions or multiword collocations, and
utterance internally. Also considered are other factors such as sex ͑women are more likely to use
fuller forms, even after controlling for rate of speech, for example͒, and some of the differences
among the ten function words in their response to the factors. © 2003 Acoustical Society of
America. ͓DOI: 10.1121/1.1534836͔
PACS numbers: 43.70.Bk, 43.70.Fq ͓AL͔

I. INTRODUCTION

The modern availability of large online labeled corpora
of conversational speech is a boon to the researcher studying
phonological production. An obvious beneﬁt of online conversational data is their ecological validity. But a less obvious beneﬁt is the opportunity it affords for greatly expanding
the range of situational and contextual effects that can be
studied. Previous studies on read speech or reiterant speech,
for example, have been able to study in detail the effect of
phonetic variables such as segmental context on phonological variation. A number of variables, however, have received
much less attention in earlier studies. In particular, the role of
larger contexts such as prosodic context, lexical context, and
the environment of the production task, is much less clear,
particularly in natural conversational settings, and particularly for disﬂuent speech. It is essential to understand the role
of these contextual factors in order to inform models of
speech production.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 113 (2), February 2003

This study investigates how the forms of English words
in natural conversation are systematically affected by three
such contextual variables: the presence or absence of neighboring disﬂuencies, the predictability of the word from the
neighboring lexical context, and the position of the word in
utterances. More speciﬁcally, it is hypothesized that words
have stronger, less lenited forms in the presence of disﬂuencies, when they are less predictable, and when they occur at
the beginning or end of utterances.
The ﬁrst of these factors concerns a ubiquitous aspect of
the production process itself, namely the disﬂuencies that
arise when a hitch occurs in the ﬂow from concept to speech.
Previous studies have suggested that the surface form of
words seem to be different when the speaker is experiencing
lexical production planning problems. For example, Fox Tree
and Clark ͑1997͒ showed that the word the was more likely
to be pronounced with a full vowel rather than a schwa in
disﬂuent contexts ͑when followed by a pause, ﬁlled pause, or

0001-4966/2003/113(2)/1001/24/$19.00

© 2003 Acoustical Society of America

1001

repetition͒. Our goal is to extend the Fox Tree and Clark
͑1997͒ study by examining whether such planning problems
affect words other than the. We also study the nature of the
form variation itself.
The second factor in our study is contextual predictability. Frequency and predictability have played a fundamental
role in models of human language processing for well over a
hundred years ͑Schuchardt, 1885; Jespersen, 1922; Zipf,
1929͒. But while modern models of human language comprehension often assume that probabilistic information plays
a role in the access and disambiguation of linguistic structures ͑Jurafsky, 1996; MacDonald, 1993; McRae et al., 1998;
Trueswell and Tanenhaus, 1994͒, the role of probability in
production is much less well understood. It is known that
frequent words are shorter and more often reduced or lenited
͑Zipf, 1929; Fidelholz, 1975; Rhodes, 1992, 1996͒, that a
second mention of a word is shorter than the ﬁrst mention
͑Fowler and Housum, 1987͒, and that words which are more
contextually predictable are produced in a less intelligible
manner ͑Lieberman, 1963͒. In earlier work, ͑Jurfsky et al.,
2001; Gregory et al., 1999͒ we proposed the Probabilistic
Reduction Hypothesis to link these phenomena: word forms
are reduced when they have a higher probability. The probability of a word is conditioned on many aspects of its context, including neighboring words, syntactic and lexical
structure, semantic expectations, and discourse factors. In
this paper we examine the role of local lexical probability:
the probability of a word given the neighboring word or
words. Our goal is to understand how this kind of local
probabilistic context affects surface phonological and phonetic form, and how it relates to other kinds of context. We
also ask whether the inﬂuence of a word’s predictability is
limited to the selection of alternate wordforms during lexical
access, or whether predictability also inﬂuences surface phonetic form directly.
The third contextual factor we investigate is prosodic
structure. The location of a word in larger prosodic domains
such as utterances, turns, intonational phrases, and phonological phrases plays an important role in reduction. Studies
of language change and of pronunciation variation have long
accepted three main effects—ﬁnal lengthening ͑Klatt, 1975;
Ladd and Campbell, 1991; Crystal and House, 1990, inter
alia͒, initial strengthening ͑i.e., more extreme articulation͒
͑Fougeron and Keating, 1997; Byrd et al., 2000, inter alia͒,
and ﬁnal weakening ͑i.e., less extreme articulation͒. During
the last several decades more and more quantitative studies
have helped make our understanding of these general effects
more precise; see Fougeron and Keating ͑1997͒ for a review.
Many of these results, however, derive from laboratory paradigms like reiterant speech, and have not been tested on
natural speech production. Furthermore, it has been difﬁcult
to tease apart prepausal lengthening from lengthening at the
edge of prosodic domains. We attempt to address these questions in the domain of natural conversational speech production.
How shall we investigate the effect of these factors?
Natural speech corpora offer a number of potential dependent variables to use to study variation in phonological production. Previous research suggests that lenition and reduc1002

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

tion, or alternatively, lengthening and strengthening, are
associated with context. We therefore focused on this dimension of variation, selecting three dependent factors: duration
of the entire word, categories of vowel quality, and presence
or absence of coda obstruents. Longer pronunciations, with
citation vowels or full vowels, are more frequent in explicit
͑e.g., formal, lento͒ styles; shorter pronunciations, with reduced or elided vowels and/or elided consonants, are more
frequent in elliptical ͑e.g., casual, allegro͒ styles. These three
variables thus reﬂect a scale of lenition, weakening, or reduction. For convenience we will use the term ‘‘reduced’’
throughout this paper to refer to the more elliptical forms.
Other aspects of reduction, such as elision of initial consonants or consonant weakening, were not considered.
We investigate this reduction or lenition not in every
word, but only in ten of the most frequent English words,
namely the function words I, and, the, that, a, you, to, of, it,
and in. Why is the study limited to just these words? Brieﬂy,
there were three main reasons. A study covering all words
was judged too ambitious and too complex for an initial
application of the multidimensional analysis methods to be
used, and one must start somewhere. The high frequencies of
occurrence of these words, their especially great form variation, and their common monosyllabic form offered important
advantages to the analysis. The fact they are also function
words, that is strongly associated with syntactic and
semantic/pragmatic structures, was not a primary consideration. Finally, and crucially, the fact that such words are not
usually accented allowed us to avoid problems of controlling
for the interaction of segmental form and presence of accent.
If the contextual effects on reduction that we postulate exist,
there should be strong evidence for them in the most frequent words; the possibly more difﬁcult task of verifying that
the effects also hold throughout the lexicon can be left for
further research.
Our data is drawn from the Switchboard corpus of telephone conversations between strangers collected in the early
1990’s ͑Godfrey et al., 1992͒. We chose the Switchboard
corpus for our research because various portions of it have
been phonetically transcribed, coded for part of speech, syntactically parsed, and segmented into utterance-like units.
The next section of the paper, Sec. II, summarizes our
methodology for extracting and coding forms, and analyzing
form variation. Section III then describes details of the various control variables; rate of speech, phonetic context, pitch
accent, etc., and summarizes their effects. Section IV focuses
on our ﬁrst contextual variable, the presence of disﬂuencies,
which we take to be largely associated with problems in
planning speech. Section V focuses on the second contextual
variable, word predictability from neighboring words. Section VI deals with the last contextual variable, the position of
a word in prosodic domains. Section VII concludes with a
discussion of the results and their implications.
II. METHODOLOGY
A. The corpus

As described above, our observations of the ten function
words I, and, the, that, a, you, to, of, it, and in were drawn
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

from the phonetically transcribed portion of the Switchboard
corpus collected in the early 1990’s ͑Godfrey et al., 1992͒.
The corpus contains 2430 conversations averaging 6 min
each, totaling 240 h of speech and approximately 3 million
words. The corpus was collected at Texas Instruments,
mostly by soliciting paid volunteers who were connected to
other volunteers via a robot telephone operator, and was then
transcribed by court reporters into a word-by-word text.
Approximately 4 h of this speech was phonetically
hand-transcribed at ICSI ͑the International Computer Science Institute͒ by linguistics students at UC Berkeley
͑Greenberg et al., 1996; Greenberg, 1997͒ as follows. The
speech ﬁles were automatically segmented into ‘‘fragments’’
at turn boundaries or at silences of 500 ms or more. The
transcribers were given these strings, the word transcription,
and a rough automatic phonetic transcription which was automatically aligned to the waveﬁle at syllable boundaries.
They then corrected this rough phonetic transcription, using
an augmented version of the ARPAbet. The transcribers also
corrected the syllable boundary marks and the silence onsets
and offsets. In general, transcribers were instructed to pay
careful attention to both the waveform and spectral displays
of the signal in making their decisions. In cases where no
speciﬁc event could be found to mark a syllable boundary,
guesses were made using tables of the duration distributions
of particular segments. These boundary marks were then
used to automatically compute syllable durations. Similarly,
pause durations were computed for portions of the signal not
attributed to a syllable. The hand-labeled and handsegmented syllables were then automatically aligned against
the word transcription, resulting in a duration for each word.
Since the current study only considers monosyllabic words,
in many cases these durations correspond exactly to the
hand-labeled syllable boundaries. In some cases where resyllabiﬁcation occurred, the automatic alignment did slightly
shift the boundaries. The entire corpus contains roughly
38 000 transcribed word tokens.
Approximately two-thirds of this phonetically transcribed corpus ͑henceforth the ICSI corpus͒ was also part of
the utterance-segmented portion of the Treebank III release
of the Switchboard corpus ͑Marcus et al., 1999͒. In this release, 1155 of the 2430 conversations were segmented by the
Linguistic Data Consortium ͑LDC͒ into approximately the
205 000 utterance-like units described in Sec. VI ͑Meteer
et al., 1995͒.
Our database thus combines information from three
sources: the original lexically transcribed Switchboard corpus, the Treebank III utterance segmentation, and the ICSI
phonetically transcribed corpus. All three of these corpora,
together with documentation describing them, are available
from the Linguistic Data Consortium at http://
www.ldc.upenn.edu/
From the phonetically transcribed data, we extracted
9926 occurrences of the ten function words. We immediately
eliminated 801 occurrences whose surface form clearly indicated an alignment error or a transcription error, such as the
word you pronounced ͓rju͔, or the word you pronounced ͓Zi͔.
This left 9125 tokens of the ten function words. Of these,
404 were alternate forms such as an, I’d, I’m, I’ll, and you’d,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

TABLE I. Most frequent pronunciations of the ten words, grouped into
basic, full, and reduced-vowel pronunciations. For each word the three most
common tokens of each type of pronunciation are listed in order of frequency.
Basic
a
the
in
of
to
and
that
I
it
you

͓|(͔
͓Z{͔,͓{͔,͓${͔
͓('͔,͓(͔,͓(T͔,
͓#3͔,͓#͔,͓#33͔
͓#É͔,͓#'͔,͓TÉ͔
͓,n͔,͓,nd͔,͓,T͔
͓Z,͔,͓Z,#͔,͓,͔
͓~(͔
͓(͔,͓(#͔,͓(T͔
͓ÑÉ͔,͓É͔,͓Ñ'͔

Other full
͓#͔,͓(͔
͓Z#͔,͓Z(͔,͓#͔
͓}'͔,͓#'͔,͓,n͔
͓(͔,͓{͔,͓Ä͔
͓#*͔,͓#(͔,͓##͔
͓}'͔,͓('͔,͓#'͔
͓Z}͔,͓Z}#͔,͓Z}T͔
͓Ä͔,͓#͔,͓,͔
͓*#͔,͓*͔,͓#͔
͓Ñ(͔,͓(͔,͓{͔

Reduced
͓.͔,͓&͔
͓Z.͔,͓Z&͔,͓.͔
͓&'͔,͓l͔,͓.'͔
͓.͔,͓.3͔,͓.)͔
͓#.͔,͓#&͔,͓.͔
͓&'͔,͓l͔,͓.'͔
͓Z&#͔,͓Z&͔,͓Z&T͔
͓.͔
͓&͔,͓.͔,͓.#͔
͓Ñ&͔,͓Ñ͔,͓&͔

you’re, etc., which because of their small numbers and incomparable forms, were excluded from our analysis. We also
excluded 361 items which were coded as ‘‘nulls,’’ i.e., as
having no segmental realization except possibly as a featural
modiﬁcation of an adjoining word. ͑The discussion below on
coding of vowel quality comments further on the null items.͒
This left 8362 items as input to our analyses. The actual
sample sizes of most analyses are smaller than this, because
not all variables apply to all the data or could not be deﬁned
for all the data; see the discussions below.
B. How forms were coded

The three dependent factors of duration, vowel quality,
and coda presence were coded in the following ways.
͑1͒ Vowel quality: We coded each vowel as basic, other full,
or reduced. The basic vowel is the citation or clariﬁcation pronunciation, e.g., ͓Zi͔ for the.1 The reduced vowels are ͓.͔ ͑arpabet ͓ax͔͒, ͓&͔ ͑arpabet ͓ix͔͒, ͓Ñ͔ ͑arpabet
͓axr͔͒, and ͓-͔ ͑midcentral reduced vowel with more
͓o͔-like or ͓u͔-like coloring than ͓.͔, not in the arpabet͒.
Any other vowel is a full vowel. This three-way distinction is split into two binary contrast variables: full/
reduced ͑basic and other full vowel versus reduced
vowel͒ and basic/full. See Table I for the most frequent
tokens of the words in each of the vowel quality categories.
͑2͒ Coda obstruent: For words which have coda obstruents
͑it, that, and, of ͒, we coded whether the consonant is
present or not. The sonorant nasal codas of in and and
were not considered.
͑3͒ Length: We coded the duration of the word in milliseconds.
In general we relied on the ICSI transcriptions for our
coding, using software to automatically assign a category to
a transcribed word. Thus, for example, if the ICSI transcription of a word was ͓.v͔, our software automatically categorized the observation as reduced vowel and coda present. We
judged the interlabeler agreements of the ICSI transcribers,
reported between 72.4% and 76.9%, to be quite acceptable
for this task. We did, however, check the data several ways,
deleting or modifying some items. As mentioned above, we
ﬁrst examined every pronunciation of every word, and elimiBell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1003

nated 801 incorrect pronunciations that were due to alignment errors in our automatic word-segmentation program.
We then listened to the utterances in ﬁve classes of tokens
that seemed likely to affect our analysis: possible misalignments in our processing, a sample of tokens transcribed as
having no segment, all tokens of arpabet ͓ux͔, all tokens of
arpabet ͓er͔, and a random sample of 100 of the function
words. Some items from these ﬁve classes were recoded,
mainly ͓ux͔ as either a nonreduced high front round vowel
͓'͔, as prescribed, or reduced ͓-͔; and ͓er͔ as either full ͓É͔
or reduced ͓Ñ͔. Some items were removed, mainly those
transcribed as having no segment ͑‘‘nulls’’͒, since from our
sample we judged that many were equally segmental as other
transcriptions. Most of the incorrect coding of these words as
having ‘‘no segments’’ was due to a mismatch between incorrect word transcriptions and the phonetic transcription for
the utterances. In these cases, the phonetic labelers transcribed the utterance correctly but did not correct the original
word-level transcription. The mismatch between these two
produced a number of alignment errors which we eliminated.
Our judgments of the tokens in the random sample in
general agreed with the original transcribers. Notably, however, we judged ﬁve of the 57 full vowels in the sample to be
reduced, whereas we agreed with the coding of all the 43
reduced vowels. This suggests that there may be a bias toward full vowels in the transcription.
Neither we nor the original Switchboard Transcription
Project at ICSI computed interlabeler agreement statistics for
syllable duration labeling. We did, however, check some segmental durations, and while in many cases we might have
slightly moved segment boundaries, we found no reason to
believe there were any gross systematic errors in duration
labeling.
The coding for each of the three major independent variables ͑planning problems, predictability, and utterance position͒ is described in the later sections pertaining to each variable.

C. Controlling for possible confounds: Regression
analysis

While the use of natural conversational corpora provides
the beneﬁts of situational validity and allows us a larger contextual window, it also presents a problem. Natural speech
has myriad confounding factors that affect form variation
such as phonetic factors, rate of speech, pitch accent, and
sociological factors like age and sex. These factors are typically correlated. We use multiple regression, both linear and
logistic, to examine the individual contributions of a variable
in this situation.
A regression analysis is a statistical model that predicts a
response variable ͑in this case, the word duration, or the
frequency of vowel reduction͒ based on contributions from a
number of other explanatory factors ͑Agresti, 1996͒. Thus,
when we report that an effect was signiﬁcant, it is meant to
be understood that it is a signiﬁcant parameter in a model
that also includes the other signiﬁcant variables. In other
words, after accounting for the effects of the other explanatory variables, adding the explanatory variable in question
1004

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

produced a signiﬁcantly better account of the variation in the
response variable.
For duration, which is a continuous variable, we use
ordinary linear regression. For vowel quality, and coda presence, which are categorical variables, we use logistic regression. Logistic regression models the effect of explanatory
variables on a categorical variable in terms of the odds of the
category, which is the ratio ͓ P(category) ͔ / ͓ 1- P(category) ͔ .
For a binary category like full versus reduced vowel, we
estimate the odds by the ratio of the percentages of the two
values: the article a occurs with a full vowel 17 percent of
the time, and with a reduced vowel, 83 percent; the odds of
a full vowel are 17/83ϭ0.20 ͑to 1͒.
It is important to understand that the goal of the regression analyses is not to create a model that will predict the
forms of function words. It is primarily used as a tool to
evaluate the signiﬁcance and magnitude of selected factors in
the presence of other correlated factors, possibly also signiﬁcant.
Of course, establishing that a factor can contribute additional improvement to a model is one of the basic facts
needed to construct production models. Much more, such as
details of dependencies among factors and magnitudes of
effects at high and low values of factors, is also needed.
Some selected questions of this sort that appear to be particularly important are explored in the sections below. For
example, we generally report important interactions, notably
the greater effect of predictability from a preceding word for
more frequent word combinations ͑Secs. V A 1, V A 2͒. Hypotheses about certain factor dependencies are tested with
speciﬁc regression models, e.g., relations between disﬂuencies and utterance-initial position, Sec. IV B 1; and relations
between word duration and vowel reduction ͑Secs. III A,
IV A, V A 3͒. A few comparisons between alternative models
are tested, e.g., the comparison between a two-factor model
distinguishing preceding and following disﬂuencies and a
single-factor model which does not, Sec. IV A.
The size of a factor’s effect is of considerable importance, since a factor can be a signiﬁcant addition, but have a
relatively small effect. The level of signiﬁcance of an effect
is often associated with its magnitude—an effect signiﬁcant
at pϭ0.0001 is likely to be greater than one that is signiﬁcant at pϭ0.01. This is not a generally appropriate measure
of effect magnitude, however, so two other measures are
commonly used. One is based on the estimated weight of the
factor in the regression equation; the other is based on the
proportion of the total variation that the factor accounts for.
The weight-based measure, which is the more direct of the
two, is reported for the main results. It is a ratio derived from
two parameters—the estimated weight and the range of the
factor. In the simplest case for a categorical factor like presence of a disﬂuency, the range is 1, so that the effect magnitude is simply proportional to the regression weight. In Sec.
IV A, the effect of a disﬂuency on vowel reduction is reported as 1.68, meaning that all other factors being equal, in
a disﬂuent context, the estimated odds that the word contains
a full vowel are 1.68 times the odds of a full vowel in a
ﬂuent context. This value is calculated by taking the regression coefﬁcient of the disﬂuency factor as a power of 10,
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

since the regression equation is based on log odds. For continuous factors, a range representing the middle 90 percent of
the data is used, from the 5th to the 95th percentiles. Thus, in
Table X, the magnitude of the effect on duration of the conditional probability given the previous word, 0.80, means
that the estimated duration of the most predictable words ͑at
the 95th percentile͒ are 0.80 times shorter than the least predictable words ͑at the 5th percentile͒.
One of the assumptions of regression analyses is that the
items in the data are independent. This assumption is surely
violated to some extent by our data, since many of the same
items are uttered by the same speaker, or in the same conversation. A more serious violation occurs when two words
are adjacent. Just how to best deal with this inherent weakness of corpus studies is not clear. Sampling one item from
each conversation, or part of a conversation, was judged too
costly. It would drastically reduce the power of the analyses
and their generality. One reason for examining the ten most
frequent function words was the expectation that in most
instances such words would be separated, and occur in separate phrases. Although this is usually the case, about 20 percent of the items do occur adjacently in combinations such as
of the and that I, which is not very surprising just given their
high frequency of occurrence. The consequence of the nonindependence of such items is that the signiﬁcance values are
inﬂated to some extent. It is thus recommended that the
reader not take the reported levels literally, but as an informed indicator of the relative signiﬁcance of an effect.
Where the signiﬁcances are very great, this is of little concern, but becomes more of one for more marginal ones.
While we have reported some effects at levels up to the
conventional 0.05 level, it seems prudent to regard any result
above pϭ0.01 as marginal.
The results are of course subject to the usual limitations
of such analyses, most notably that they apply strictly only to
the present database and to the particular operational coding
used. In many ways, the database can be considered generally representative of American English conversation. But
some of the speciﬁc characteristics of the data, for example,
the particular way that fragments of conversations were selected for the ICSI database, require simpliﬁcations in variable deﬁnitions and sample selections that inevitably introduce some degree of bias. Examination of many such cases
has not yielded any reason to think that the distortions are
large enough to invalidate the main results. Nevertheless, it
is perhaps well to regard the quantitative measures of the
results as pertaining to this database, and to take the results
more qualitatively as a basis, together with further research,
for constructing production models.
III. CONTROL FACTORS

The reduction variables are each inﬂuenced by multiple
factors that must be controlled to assess the contribution of
the explanatory variables—presence of disﬂuencies, predictability, and position in turn. While it is of course not possible
to control for every factor which inﬂuences reduction, we
consider here the ones that are, from prior research, most
likely to play a large role.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

FIG. 1. Function word durations and proportions of full vowels by rate of
speech. The scale for duration is on the left axis, the scale for full vowels is
on the right. The number of observations for each rate category appears at
the bottom of the graph.

͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒
͑iv͒
͑v͒

rate of speech of the speaker in syllables/second;
segmental context;
prosodic factors;
age and sex of speaker and hearer; and
individual characteristics of the ten function words.

The focus of the paper leads us to regard these as control
factors rather than object of study in their own right. The role
of rate, phonetic context, and prosody in reduction is of
course well-established. A detailed study of speaker and
hearer effects in conversational speech is beyond the scope
of this paper, in spite of its considerable interest. This section, therefore, reports primarily the details of the variables
we selected to control these factors. Selected results about
how these variables affect reduction are also presented.
A. Control factors: Rate of speech

Speech researchers have long noted the association between faster speech, informal styles, and more reduced
forms. ͓For a recent quantitative account of rate effects in
Switchboard, see Fosler-Lussier and Morgan ͑1999͔͒. We
measured rate of speech at a given function word by taking
the number of syllables per second in the speech fragment
immediately surrounding the word, up to the nearest pause or
turn boundary on each side. Fifty-one words with extremely
slow or extremely fast rates were excluded from regression
analyses. Unsurprisingly, rate of speech affected all measures
of reduction. Words were more reduced when they were spoken more quickly. Comparing the difference between a relatively fast rate of 7.5 syllables per second and a slow rate of
2.5 syllables per second, a range which covers about 90 percent of the tokens, the estimated increase in the odds of full
to reduced vowels is 2.2. That is, the odds of a full vowel at
the slow rate is 2.2 times the odds at the faster rate. Figure 1
compares observed proportions ͑or averages, for length͒ with
predicted values for ﬁve categories of rate along the range
from 2.5 to 7.5 syllables per second. ͑The increased proportion of full vowels at the highest rate category is presumably
not systematic.͒
For all measures, there seems to be a limit effect for
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1005

faster rates; this is accounted for in the regression model by
using log ͑rate͒ as the main explanatory variable as well as a
͑highly signiﬁcant͒ quadratic log2 ͑rate͒ term. The overall
effect of rate is weaker for coda deletion than for the other
measures of reduction; in addition, the effect on deletion is
largely conﬁned to the slower rates.
Are the shortening effects for function words solely a
consequence of a greater proportion of reduced ͑and shorter͒
vowels at faster rates? If they were, the apparently gradient
effect of rate of speech on durational shortening might represent not a gradient effect of rate, but a categorical effect,
stemming from more frequent selection of reduced vowel
forms at faster speech rates. It turns out that there is a substantial additional shortening effect of rate even after accounting for vowel reduction and coda deletion. Overall,
with no other variables involved, rate accounts for 17.9 percent of the variation in duration of the function words. With
no other variables involved, vowel reduction and coda deletion account for 18.4 percent of the variation. After controlling for vowel reduction and coda deletion, rate still accounts
for an additional 13.9 percent of the variation. A ﬁnal characteristic of rate is that it did not affect all the words equally.
The most strongly affected words were a, the, to, and, and I.
Notably, regressions for that, it, and in did not show rate
effects for any of the three vowel or coda reduction measures.
B. Control factors: Segmental context

A general fact about weakening processes is that the
form of a word is inﬂuenced by the segmental context—in
particular, more reduced forms tend to occur before a consonant than before a vowel ͑Rhodes, 1996, inter alia͒. This
may result in an allophonic effect such as the widely studied
loss of ﬁnal /t/ and /d/ ͑Neu, 1980, and references therein͒.
Alternatively, it may be an allomorphic one, as in the case of
the with ͓Zi͔ before vowels alternating with ͓Z.͔ before consonants ͑Keating et al., 1994͒. The preceding segmental context is presumed to have much less inﬂuence.
Thus, for each of the function word tokens, we recorded
whether the following word began with a consonant or a
vowel. To account for an interaction between this following
segment and the ﬁnal obstruent consonant of the function
word itself, we distinguished four separate contexts: V#V,
V#CV, VC#V, and VC#CV. The nasals of and and in were
treated as if they belonged to the nucleus, both because they
can be expected to behave differently from the obstruents,
and also because the interplay between vowel nasalization
and nasal consonant shortening is not captured by the ICSI
phonetic transcription.
In addition, the metrical strength of the following word
or words can also be expected to inﬂuence reduction. Here,
we attempted to capture some portion of this inﬂuence by
coding each function word with a variable distinguishing
whether the vowel of the following syllable is full or reduced. In general, since reduced vowels cannot be stressed or
bear intonational accents, this variable may be regarded as
mainly differentiating cases where the next potential prosodically strong syllable either follows directly or else one or
more syllables later. A more direct effect is predicted by
1006

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

TABLE II. Observed average durations and reduced vowel percentages of
closed-syllable ͑VC͒ and open-syllable ͑V͒ function words before words
beginning with consonants and with vowels.

Word
consonant
follows
vowel
follows

Next
word

Duration
͑ms͒

Percentage of
reduced vowels

VC
V
VC
V

CV
CV
V
V

132
102
158
128

33.7
45.6
29.7
33.0

Bolinger’s ͑1986͒ lengthening rule, which states that a full
vowel is lengthened if the next vowel is also full.
Observed average duration and the percentage of reduced vowels are shown in Table II for the four contexts.
Before a consonant in the next word, words are shorter and
are more likely to be reduced. These differences were assessed by regressions after controlling for rate effects. For
both vowel reduction and shortening, the onset of the following word has a very strong effect. Overall, the odds of vowel
reduction are 1.63 times greater before consonants than before vowels, and item durations are 0.79 times shorter before
consonants than before vowels. The consonant–vowel effect
on vowel reduction is stronger for open-syllable words than
for closed-syllable ones; the effect for closed syllables is still
highly signiﬁcant (pϭ0.0005).
The full-reduced status of the vowel in the next word
affects open-syllable items, whose vowels are more likely to
be reduced if the next word has a full vowel in its ﬁrst syllable ͑whether it begins with a consonant or not͒. This is a
moderately signiﬁcant effect (pϭ0.007, odds ratio of 1.43͒;
there is no signiﬁcant effect of the following vowel for
closed-syllable items. Duration is also affected by the category of the vowel in the next word, but in a complex way.
In the VC#CV and V#V contexts, there is little effect. Opensyllable items before consonants ͑the V#CV context͒ are
shorter ͑by a factor of 0.82͒ if a full vowel follows, but
closed-syllable items before vowels ͑the VC#V context͒ are
shorter ͑by a factor of .84͒ if a reduced vowel follows.2
As with rate, shortening effects are still strong after controlling for vowel reduction. Overall, for example, the onset
of the following word accounts for 4.1 percent of the variance; within reduced or full vowels, it still accounts for 3.6
percent of the variance. Individual analyses by item largely
conﬁrm the overall results for reduction and shortening. Only
you for lengthening and that and in for reduction fail to show
signiﬁcant effects, which of course may be partially laid at
the door of the smaller sample sizes.
C. Control factors: Intonational accent

One of the most important factors inﬂuencing an English
word’s pronunciation is whether it receives accent or not.
Presence of accent is surely highly correlated with longer
duration, lack of vowel reduction, and lack of elision, and
likely has systematic associations with the presence of disﬂuencies, a word’s predictability, and its position in the intonational phrase, the explanatory variables that are considered here. The most general way of accounting for its role in
wordform variation is to regard it as one of the attributes of
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

a word’s form together with its segmental attributes of duration, vowel reduction, etc., that is, as a response or observational variable. Desirable as this might be, it entails analytic
complexities and model-theoretic assumptions that seemed
premature at our present stage of knowledge. The alternative
is to focus on the word’s segmental form, and treat the prosodic status as an explanatory variable, part of the general
context in which the word occurs, and one of the factors
inﬂuencing the form of the word. Since intonational accent is
not transcribed in the ICSI database, we could not examine
its effects or control for them directly. One of the main reasons for studying high-frequency function words was that
they are unlikely to be accented. It was our hope that the
possible confound of accent with variables such as disﬂuency and predictability would be so infrequent that it would
have little inﬂuence on their analysis. Fortunately, we have
been able to verify this perhaps incautious hope, making use
of two small accent-coded subcorpora from Switchboard.
The ﬁrst was a small portion of Switchboard that has been
coded for accent under the direction of Shattuck-Hufnagel
and Ostendorf, an alpha-release version of which they generously made available to us. The Shattuck-Hufnagel/
Ostendorf corpus used a labeling scheme called POSH
͑Shattuck-Hufnagel and Ostendorf, 1999͒, a simpliﬁcation of
the TOBI prosodic labeling standard ͑Silverman et al., 1992͒.
In addition to the Shattuck-Hufnagel/Ostendorf corpus, we
coded a very small subsample of Switchboard consisting of
120 words selected from the longest tokens of each function
word; it was composed of 10 tokens of each function word,
except for those which may be pronouns, I ͑20 tokens͒, you
͑15 tokens͒, and that ͑15 tokens͒.
The overlap between the Shattuck-Hufnagel/Ostendorf
corpus and the most inclusive sample used in our analyses
͑8311 words͒ was 560 words. Of this set, 53, or 9.5 percent,
were accented. ͑A larger proportion, 23 percent, were accented in our 120-word sample, presumably because of its
heavy bias toward items most likely to be accented.͒ A majority of the accented words was either that ͑16͒ or I ͑15͒;
with and ͑6͒, you ͑5͒, and in ͑4͒, they accounted for all but
seven of the accented words. This concentration of accent on
particular function words more or less agreed with our
sample, in which only four functors had more than one accented token: I, 12 of 20; you, 7 of 15; that, 4 of 15; and and,
2 of 10. It appears that function words are indeed not likely
to be accented, but some function words are much less likely
than others to bear accent.
In order to determine whether the accent-coded data
were representative of our entire database of phonetically
transcribed words, we compared relative frequencies of the
function words, rates of reduction, duration, rates of preceding and following disﬂuencies, and preceding and following
conditional and joint probabilities, using chi-square or Fisher
tests for the categorical variables and t-tests for the continuous ones. Since only one of the nine comparisons was even
close to signiﬁcant, the subset of accented-coded data appeared to represent the overall sample reasonably well. We
also examined the association of accent with disﬂuencies and
with predictability. This conﬁrmed our expectation that accented words would be more likely to occur in disﬂuent conJ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

texts and that their conditional probabilities would on average be lower than unaccented words. Only for a previous
disﬂuency, however, was the difference signiﬁcant ͑onetailed Fisher test, pϭ0.001), perhaps because of the small
sample.
The main question, of course, is whether the effects of
the explanatory variables remain after controlling for pitch
accent. We addressed this by examining only the 385 words
without accent. ͑The accented words were too few to make
including them in an analysis useful.͒ The details of the comparison of this analysis with the full analyses are presented in
the following sections that treat the effects of disﬂuencies
and of predictability on duration. Overall, as will be seen, the
effects that are found for the unaccented word sample are
similar to those for the overall sample uncontrolled for accent. These results are necessarily preliminary and incomplete. We did not examine whether accent might be masking
the role of disﬂuencies and predictability on vowel reduction,
basic versus nonbasic vowels, and coda deletion. There were
not enough data to examine effects of position or effects for
individual words. The clear results for duration, however,
support our strategy of examining the factors affecting form
variation in function words in the absence of controls for
accent. Note also that the results for the individual words
which virtually never receive accent are further support. Obviously, important questions about the role of accent remain,
both for function words and content words.

D. Control factors: Age and sex of speaker and
hearer

Studies of socially sensitive pronunciation variation
such as the alternation of -ing and -in ͑Wald and Shopen,
1981͒ have shown that the status of speaker and hearer is
often a factor in such variation. It is likely that such inﬂuences extend to our reduction variables, given that all our
indices of variation are doubtless linked to the choice of
elliptical versus explicit styles of speech, which is in turn
sensitive to the speech situation. While an earlier study of the
TIMIT corpus of read speech by Byrd ͑1994͒ did not ﬁnd an
effect of speaker sex on the duration of centralized vowels,
she did ﬁnd that men use certain more reduced forms such as
taps and syllabic n more frequently than women. Previous
research has also shown that rate and disﬂuencies are sensitive to the age and sex of speakers. Byrd ͑1994͒ found that
men spoke TIMIT sentences on average 6.2 percent faster
than women. Shriberg ͑1999͒, in her study of disﬂuencies in
Switchboard, found that men had slightly more disﬂuencies
per word than women. There is thus good reason a priori to
control for speaker and hearer status. In this section we
present a simple survey of the overall differences in reduction, rate, and disﬂuencies associated with the age and sex of
speakers and hearers in our dataset.3 Since this survey is
meant only to provide a basis for the use of these factors as
controls, we do not provide detailed analyses with individual
assessments of signiﬁcance. Some summaries of analyses for
individual items are included in Secs. IV B, V B, and VI B.
The more complex analysis needed to assess their effects on
production is left for future study.
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1007

FIG. 3. Predicted average speech rates of men and women speakers by age.

FIG. 2. Average word durations of function words of men and women
speakers by age.

The ages of the 497 participants in our sample of
Switchboard conversations ranged from 18 to 68; the mean
age of the speakers was 37. There were 191 men speakers
and 172 women, and 237 men listeners and 216 women.
More items were spoken by men ͑58 percent͒ than by
women ͑42 percent͒.

1. Effects of speaker and hearer on reduction
variables

All the reduction measures are affected by the speaker’s
status.
͑i͒

͑ii͒

͑iii͒
͑iv͒

Duration: The average durations of function words are
shown in Fig. 2 for men and women speakers by age
category. Words spoken by women are longer ͑140
ms͒ than those spoken by men ͑131 ms͒, and words
spoken by older speakers are longer ͑139 ms for
speakers 40 and older versus 131 ms for those under
40͒, with the difference greater between older men
and women.
Vowel reduction: The sex of speaker has the strongest
effect on vowel reduction; there is little difference for
older or younger speakers. Words spoken by men are
reduced 41 percent of the time on average, but only
34 percent of the time for women.
Coda deletion: On the other hand, women speakers
delete codas more frequently than men, 68 percent to
63 percent.
Basic vowel: Basic vowels are used more by older
speakers than by younger ones; speakers under 40 use
basic vowels 60 percent of the time, but this increases
to 66 percent for speakers 40 and older ͑69 percent for
speakers 60 and older͒.

These uncontrolled differences are signiﬁcant at levels from
pϽ0.005 to pϽ0.0001.
Differences associated with listener status are much
smaller, and not signiﬁcant, except perhaps for vowel reduction. Words are more often reduced when spoken to younger
1008

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

listeners under 40 than to older listeners (pϽ0.05). There
were no dyad effects of speaker and listener age or of
speaker and listener sex.
Overall, reduction in function words is affected mainly
by the age and sex of the speaker, and mainly in the directions that one would expect from the usual correlations of
speaker status and levels of formality in speech: longer durations with less reduction of vowels and greater use of basic
vowels by women and by older speakers.
2. Effect of age and sex on rate and on disﬂuencies

On average men spoke 6.4 percent faster than women.
Men had an average rate of 5.4 syllables per second: women,
an average rate of 5.0 syllables per second.4 Younger speakers spoke more quickly, 5.5 syllables per second for speakers
under 30, compared to 5.1 syllables per second for speakers
50 and older. Finally, there was an interaction of age and sex.
While women on average spoke more slowly than men, older
women spoke even more slowly than older men. These relationships are shown in Fig. 3, which presents the regressions
of rate on age for men and women. There do not appear to be
any differences in rate for different listener statuses.
The average rate of disﬂuency was 31.9 percent, where
by disﬂuency we mean the presence of a disﬂuency either
before or after a given function word. Interestingly, uncontrolled averages reveal little difference between men and
women speakers of different ages, nor between men and
women listeners of different ages. Since this was not consistent with Shriberg’s ͑1999͒ results, we explored disﬂuency
effects by controlling for rate and for the probability variables. The results agreed with Shriberg’s ﬁnding that men
have a higher rate of disﬂuency than women.
E. Control factors: Individual characteristics of the
words

Different function words play different grammatical
roles, have different distributions, have different kinds of
meanings, and have different phonological forms. One
should therefore expect some differences in how their reduction is affected by other factors. While it would be impractical and probably undesirable to control for item effects in
analyses for overall effects of disﬂuencies, predictability, and
utterance position, the idiosyncrasies of the ten function
words unquestionably affect such results. It is thus important
to compare their basic characteristics.
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

TABLE III. Frequencies of occurrence of the ten function words in the data.
I

and

the

that

to

you

a

of

it

in

Total

1381

1203

1123

786

769

758

745

583

562

452

8362

First, some are more frequent than others in our sample,
reﬂecting their relative frequency in conversational speech. I,
and, and the are the most frequent, and of, it, and in are the
least, as can be seen in Table III.
The frequency range from most to least frequent is about
3 to 1, quite modest for lexical frequency in general, but to
be expected since these are the ten most frequent words in
the Switchboard corpus. One consequence of this distribution is that one cannot investigate the effect of lexical frequency on reduction with this database. This is partly because of the narrow range of frequencies, but more crucially
because item frequency is confounded with other item idiosyncrasies in this small set, and there is no way to pull them
apart. The other issue is the relative inﬂuence of the items on
the overall results. Clearly the most frequent words will have
more inﬂuence than the least frequent ones, and this needs to
be kept in mind in the following discussions. It is also not
advised to view this as an improper distortion of the results,
since after all, the proportions of each word reﬂect their relative occurrence in conversational speech.
Next, the items differ considerably in their average durations and average rates of occurrence of basic, full, and
reduced vowels and of coda deletion, resulting in different
base levels for the overall effects on these variables.
Figure 4 shows the average durations of the ten function
words. In this and following ﬁgures and tables, the words
have been grouped by dominant function: articles a, the;
prepositions/particles in, of, to; conjunctions and, that; and
pronouns I, it, you. And and that are notably longer, in part
because their vowel is intrinsically long and because they
have a complex syllable structure. Similarly, the shortness of
the article a probably reﬂects its single vowel.
Striking differences in the average rates of occurrence of
full, unreduced vowels can be seen in Fig. 5. Six words,
including and and that, have relatively high proportions of

FIG. 4. Observed average durations of function words. The average duration
of all words is 135 ms.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

unreduced vowels, between about 65 percent and 95 percent;
the others, including the article a, are much less likely to
have an unreduced vowel ͑between about 25 percent and 35
percent͒. Thus another reason that and and that are longer is
because they more often have full vowels. Likewise, the frequent reduced forms of a contribute to its relative shortness.
Obstruent codas are present in about the same proportion for
that, it, and of ͑44 percent for that and it, 54 percent for of ͒;
on the other hand, the very infrequent presence of the ﬁnal
stop of and ͑14 percent͒ suggests that the alternation between
͓n͔ and ͓nd͔ may stem in part from selection between distinct
lexical forms of and.
Such item differences can affect our results in two main
ways. First, the longest and shortest ͑or most/least reduced͒
items may contribute to ﬂoor or ceiling effects for some factors. As we mention below in Sec. IV B, a ceiling appears to
be at least one factor responsible for that, I, and it not showing fewer reduced vowels in the context of following disﬂuencies. Their proportion of unreduced vowels is already so
high it cannot become much higher. A second way is for one
or more of the items with atypical forms or behaviors to be
disproportionately represented over the range of a factor.
One example of this is the very frequent occurrence of and in
utterance-initial position, discussed below in Sec. VI B.
Since and is long, it should exaggerate an initial lengthening
effect; as we see later, if and is excluded from the analysis,
the effect on duration in initial position is indeed reduced,
although it remains signiﬁcant.
There are of course additional differences in the behavior of the function words with respect to disﬂuencies, predictability variables, and utterance position, which largely
reﬂect their functional differences. Some of the most salient
such differences are discussed in the following sections. In
lieu of controlling for item differences, we note below the
consistency of effects over the function words, or lack of it.
This provides a general indication of the robustness of the
effects, and in some instances of markedly aberrant items, it
suggests certain factors which may be responsible.

FIG. 5. Observed average frequency of occurrence of unreduced ͑full͒ vowels in function words. The average frequency for all words is 0.62.
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1009

TABLE IV. Observed durations, frequencies of basic and full vowels, and frequencies of coda presence for
function words in ﬂuent and disﬂuent contexts. The number of observations of the context categories appears in
parentheses. Basic vowel frequencies are based on the 4886 words with full vowels. Obstruent coda presence
frequencies are based on the 2947 words and, it, of, and that.
Context
Fluent
Any disﬂuency
Disﬂuency before
Disﬂuency after
Disﬂuency both

Duration
109
187
137
222
295

ms
ms
ms
ms
ms

͑5480͒
͑2519͒
͑1295͒
͑927͒
͑297͒

Full vowel
54%
77%
73%
80%
91%

F. Summary of control factors

Most of the factors discussed above are controlled in our
regression analyses by including appropriate variables in a
base model. Our base regression models thus include the
following variables.
͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒
͑iv͒
͑v͒

Log rate of speech and log squared of rate of speech;
Syllable type of target ͑open, closed͒;
Whether initial segment of next word begins with
consonant or vowel;
Whether following vowel is reduced; and
Age and sex of speaker, age of listener.

Included also were signiﬁcant interaction variables, e.g.,
rateϫspeaker age. Some of these variables were dropped
when they had negligible effect, e.g., listener age for duration analyses. The results presented below are based on
analyses that controlled utterance position by excluding
utterance-initial and utterance-ﬁnal items, rather than with
base models including utterance position variables, for reasons explained below. The effects of intonational accent,
which could not be controlled, are assessed by comparing
results from the accent-coded subsample described above
with the results for the effects of disﬂuencies and of predictability; see note 8 in Sec. IV A and note 11 in Sec. V A 1.
Similarly, rather than controlling for the differences among
the function words, we summarize the results of analyses for
each of the words individually in the following sections, and
discuss the behaviors of selected words in more detail.
IV. PLANNING PROBLEMS AND DISFLUENCIES

The production of speech is accompanied by a variety of
disﬂuencies, whose characteristics have been extensively
documented ͑Shriberg, 1994, inter alia͒. In particular, it appears that certain disﬂuencies often have a prospective
source, occurring as a reaction to speakers’ trouble in formulating an upcoming idea, and expressing it with the proper
syntax, words, prosody, and articulation. Fox Tree and Clark
͑1997͒ suggested that such planning problems are likely to
cause neighboring words to have less reduced pronunciations. They found this to be true for the, and suggested that
the pronunciation ͓Zi͔ is used by the speaker as a signal of
problems in production. Fox Tree and Clark suggested that
this relationship might extend to other words. Other work
has also pointed to form effects in disﬂuent contexts.
O’Shaughnessy ͑1992͒, for example, argued that words
lengthen before pauses, and Shriberg ͑1995͒ showed that
1010

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

͑5480͒
͑2519͒
͑1295͒
͑927͒
͑297͒

Basic vowel
64%
64%
59%
66%
75%

Coda presence

͑2936͒
͑1950͒
͑940͒
͑741͒
͑269͒

33%
39%
26%
42%
59%

͑1948͒
͑999͒
͑366͒
͑483͒
͑150͒

forms of I and the were longer when they were repeated. It
thus seems worthwhile to adopt the working hypothesis that
longer and fuller forms are generally associated with planning problems, whether they function as signals of planning
problems, or are part of production mechanisms to gain time
to resolve planning problems, or some combination of the
two.
In this section we extend such investigations to study the
general relationship between disﬂuencies and pronunciation
reduction in frequent words. Like Fox Tree and Clark ͑1997͒,
we treat silent pauses, ﬁlled pauses uh and um, and repetitions as likely to be symptoms of planning problems. Each of
the functors in our corpus is coded as belonging to a disﬂuent
context if it is preceded or followed by one of these
disﬂuencies.5
The following examples from our corpus illustrate the
different disﬂuency contexts; numbers in parentheses are silence lengths in seconds.
Following disﬂuency
Repetition
Silence
Filled pause ͑uh͒

Sentence
I I have strong objections to that.
...large numbers of ͑0.228͒ barefoot
natives or something...
Somebody I talked to last week,
they said they had the uh, they had
problems doing some of the work

Preceding disﬂuency
Repetition
Silence
Filled pause ͑uh͒

Sentence
I I have strong objections to that.
You know, the main things that I like
about ͑0.214͒ the uh, job beneﬁts...
it would encourage people, uh, to
make more money

After eliminating uncodable items, there were 7999
function words coded for occurrence in preceding and following disﬂuent contexts. Of these, 2519, or 31 percent, occurred before or after a disﬂuency; 12 percent were followed
by a disﬂuency, 16 percent were preceded by a disﬂuency,
and four percent occurred between disﬂuencies.
A. Effects of disﬂuencies

Table IV compares durations, basic vowel frequency, reduced vowel frequency, and frequency of coda presence in
ﬂuent and disﬂuent contexts. Overall, longer and fuller forms
are strongly associated with disﬂuencies, consistent with the
hypothesis that they are symptoms of planning problems.
These observed differences, however, may not be a diBell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

TABLE V. Occurrence of disﬂuencies before and after function words. The
percentages of following disﬂuencies are also shown.
Disﬂuency before
Yes
Disﬂuency
after

Yes
No
Total

No

Total

297
24%
1295
19%
1592
23%

927
76%
5480
81%
6407
77%

1224
100%
6775
100%
7999
100%

rect indication of the effect of the disﬂuency since other factors affecting the form of words might be systematically associated with disﬂuencies. We therefore evaluated the effect
of disﬂuencies in regression models after controlling for the
control factors listed above in Sec. III F, for the predictability
variables listed in Table IX below, and for relevant interactions among these variables.6
Neighboring disﬂuencies exert a strong inﬂuence on duration and on the frequency of full versus reduced vowels, in
addition to effects of the control and predictability variables.
They also moderately affect the frequency of basic vowels,
but have no signiﬁcant effect on coda deletion. The estimated
magnitudes and signiﬁcances of the effects are summarized
as follows.
͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒

Duration: words in disﬂuent contexts are 1.34 times
longer ͓ F(1,6200)ϭ353.8, pϽ0.0001͔ .
Vowel reduction: the odds of a word containing a
full, unreduced vowel in a disﬂuent context are 1.68
times greater ( ␹ 2 ϭ45.9, pϽ0.0001).
Basic vowel: the odds of a basic vowel form of a
word occurring in a disﬂuent context are 1.23 times
greater ͓ ␹ 2 (1)ϭ5.8, pϽ0.02͔ .

Examining Table IV in more detail suggests that preceding and following disﬂuencies have different effects, and furthermore, that following disﬂuencies exert a stronger effect
than preceding ones. We need to address the following questions.
͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒

Is the effect of a disﬂuency before a word independent
of the effect of one after the word?
When disﬂuencies occur before and after a word, are
their effects cumulative? Multiplicative?
Are the effects of a disﬂuency after a word greater
than the effects of one before a word?

Table V shows that disﬂuencies are more likely to occur
in the presence of another disﬂuency. Although the increase

in the likelihood of a disﬂuency in one position given that
one occurs in the other position is not large, the association is
highly signiﬁcant ͓ ␹ 2 (1)ϭ17.3, pϽ0.0001͔ .
The effects are multiplicative. ͑Recall that the response
variables in the regression analysis are logs of duration or of
odds, so that additivity of factors in the regression model
corresponds to multiplicativity of the untransformed variables.͒ Regressions with the variables for preceding and for
following disﬂuencies show no signiﬁcant effect for the interaction between the two. These results suggest, at least for
duration and vowel reduction, that models with separate variables for preceding and following disﬂuencies are preferred
to ones with a single variable for disﬂuencies in either position. The estimated magnitudes and signiﬁcances of the effects are summarized in Table VI.
Since the effects are multiplicative, the effect on a word
both preceded and followed by a disﬂuency is given by the
product of effects in Table VI. For example, the estimated
duration of such a word is 1.87 times that of a word not next
to a disﬂuency (1.22ϫ1.51, with rounding errors͒. Although
the effects in Table VI are qualitatively comparable to those
that could be derived from the uncontrolled observations in
Table IV, they are in general smaller, and in some cases,
much smaller. The estimated duration effects in Table VI, for
example, 1.22 for preceding and 1.51 for following disﬂuencies, compared to effects of 1.30 and 2.10, respectively, derived from the observed average durations in Table IV.
Turning now to following versus preceding disﬂuencies,
the effect of a following disﬂuency is greater than for a preceding one for duration ͓ F(1,6200)ϭ55.7, pϽ0.0001͔ . 7 The
difference between the two, however, is not signiﬁcant for
vowel reduction. Nor is it signiﬁcant for the basic vowel
variable. In summary, then, effects on duration are clearly
best modeled with separate factors for preceding and following disﬂuencies. For these data, simpler single-factor models
are adequate to account for the effects on the presence of full
vowels and of basic vowels.8
Disﬂuencies appear to affect duration more strongly than
the other measures of reduction. This pattern is repeated for
the other factors that are discussed in successive sections.
One obvious reason for this might be that the duration of a
word encompasses all lenition factors, whereas the categorical variables target more speciﬁc ones. This raises the question of the interdependence of the response variables. Here,
we focus on one important aspect of this general issue: Are
the effects on duration simply consequences of the shortening effects of vowel reduction, nonbasic vowels, and coda
deletion? The answer is emphatically no. As one would expect, all the categorical variables, especially vowel reduc-

TABLE VI. Estimated magnitudes and signiﬁcance of the effects of disﬂuencies before and after a target word. The magnitudes for duration are the regression
estimates of how much longer words are in the disﬂuent context. For the full vowel variable, they are estimates of the increase in the odds of occurrence of
a full vowel in a disﬂuent context, compared to a ﬂuent one.
Disﬂuency before
Response variable
Duration
Full vowel

Effect
1.22
1.59

Disﬂuency after

Signiﬁcance

Effect

F(1,6200)ϭ120.5, pϽ0.0001
␹ 2 (1)ϭ27.8, pϽ0.0001

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

1.51
1.68

Signiﬁcance
F(1,6200)ϭ322.5, pϽ0.0001
␹ 2 (1)ϭ18.5, pϽ0.0001

Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1011

FIG. 6. Proportion of occurrences in a preceding or following disﬂuent
context for each function word. Overall, the proportion of words occurring
in disﬂuent contexts is 0.32. The values are based on 8045 observations.

tion, do signiﬁcantly affect duration. Nevertheless, after controlling for reduced and basic vowels, the effects of
preceding and following disﬂuencies on duration are still
very strong: 1.19 times longer after a disﬂuency
͓ F(1,6198)ϭ101.3, pϽ0.0001͔ and 1.48 times longer before a disﬂuency ͓ F(1,6198)ϭ314.1, pϽ0.0001͔ . Moreover, since there is no interaction between presence of preceding or following disﬂuencies and vowel reduction,
disﬂuencies lengthen full vowels and reduced vowels in the
same way.
There are a number of signiﬁcant interactions of the disﬂuency variables with rate, context variables, age of speaker,
and following word predictability variables. These interactions indicate that the effects of disﬂuencies vary to some
degree for higher or lower values of the interacting variables.
The effects are relatively small and mostly limited to effects
on duration.
B. Items and disﬂuencies

The frequencies of occurrence of the ten function words
in disﬂuent contexts vary widely. Figure 6 shows the proportion of observations of each function word in a disﬂuent
context, either preceded or followed by a disﬂuency or both.9
A general grouping by syntactic function is evident here. The

complementizers/conjunctions and and that and the pronouns have the highest rates of occurrence in disﬂuent contexts, while the prepositions and the articles have the lowest
rates. This suggests, not surprisingly, that syntactic class
plays a role in the form and behavior of function words.
Consideration of this issue is limited here to the remarks
about some effects of the collocation you know and the binomial construction X and Y in Secs. IV B 2, V B 1, V B 2,
and VI B below; see also Jurafsky et al. ͑2002͒.
More crucially for the assessment of an overall effect of
disﬂuencies on reduction, the function words more likely to
occur with disﬂuencies—and, that, I, it, and you—are in general both longer ͑especially and and that͒ and more frequent
overall than the words occurring less frequently with disﬂuencies. This has the consequence that the average disﬂuent
duration for all the words will be longer than the average
ﬂuent duration, even if there were no difference between
each word’s average duration in ﬂuent and disﬂuent contexts.
It is thus necessary to examine disﬂuency effects for the
individual words before accepting the results of Sec. IV A
above as valid.
Table VII summarizes the effects of disﬂuencies for the
ten function words.
Examining ﬁrst the effects on function word durations,
longer durations are found in the presence of disﬂuencies for
all ten of the function words, thus conﬁrming the general
effect. The effect of a following disﬂuency is more general
than the effect of a preceding one, in parallel with the stronger overall effect found for following disﬂuencies. Since in is
the least frequent of the words, failure to ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
effect for a preceding disﬂuency is possibly due to the small
sample; we did not explore other possibilities. There is, however, clearly no effect of a preceding disﬂuency for you. In
Sec. IV B 2 below, it will be seen that this is likely due to two
facts: ͑1͒ most of the preceding disﬂuencies occurred before
you know, and ͑2͒ the you in you know is reduced rather than
lengthened.
On the other hand, effects on vowel quality ͑whether the
vowel was full or reduced, and whether full vowels were the
word’s basic vowel or another vowel͒ were spottier, judging
from analyses of the individual words. The results support a
general effect of less vowel reduction next to disﬂuencies,

TABLE VII. Signiﬁcances of the effects of neighboring disﬂuencies on individual function words. Preceding and following disﬂuencies have been collapsed
for the vowel reduction and basic vowel variables.
Effect on

a

the

in

of

to

and

that

I

it

you

Duration
by a following
disﬂuency

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

Duration
by a preceding
disﬂuency

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

ns

Ͻ0.005

0.01

Ͻ0.0001

0.02

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.0001

ns

Reduced vowel
by
any disﬂuency

Ͻ0.0001

Ͻ0.05

0.001

0.01

Ͻ0.02

Ͻ0.0001

ns

ns

ns

ns

Basic vowel by
any disﬂuency

ns

ns

ns

Ͻ0.01

ns

ns

Ͻ0.02

ns

1012

0.02

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

ns

Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

FIG. 7. Observed proportions of basic, full, and reduced vowels for the ten
function words in nondisﬂuent contexts and in disﬂuent contexts. For each
data point, the proportions of the three vowel categories sum to 1.0. Hence,
the term full is used here in the special sense of not reduced and not basic.
The proportions are based on 8045 observations, 5480 in nondisﬂuent contexts, 2565 in disﬂuent contexts.

since they reach signiﬁcance for six of the function words for
combined effects of preceding and following disﬂuencies,
and, as we see below, the lack of signiﬁcance for I, it, and
that may be due to a ceiling effect. It is not clear that there is
a general effect of more basic vowels next to disﬂuencies,
though, since only three words show effects individually.
The overall picture is easier to evaluate by combining the
effects on reduced and basic vowels and examining them
together for all the words, as presented in Fig. 7. ͑Note that
in this ﬁgure, and in this section, we use the term ‘‘full’’ in
the sense of nonbasic full, unlike the earlier use to mean any
unreduced vowel.͒ In ﬂuent contexts ͑indicated by ﬁlled
crosses in the ﬁgure͒, the words vary greatly in the relative
frequency of the vowel classes, basic, ͑nonbasic͒ full, and
reduced, and this likely plays a role in how they are affected
by neighboring disﬂuencies. In this ﬁgure, an arrow pointing
down indicates that a word has fewer reduced vowels in
disﬂuent contexts; if the arrow slants to the left, it also indicates that a word has a greater proportion of basic to nonbasic vowels in disﬂuent contexts. As one would expect from
the overall results, most of the words exhibit one or both of
these relations.
You is clearly anomalous, showing if anything an effect
of disﬂuency in the opposite direction of the other words;
some reasons for this surprising behavior are explored in
Sec. IV B 2. The words along the left edge of the ﬁgure—of,
in, and it—essentially have no nonbasic full vowels; hence,
in a disﬂuent context, basic vowel frequency increases at the
expense of reduced vowels. The lack of a signiﬁcant increase
in reduced vowel frequency for the three words at the bottom
of the ﬁgure—I, it, and that—can possibly be attributed to
their already very low rates of reduction, 16 percent or less.
The lack of any increase in the basic vowels of I and that, on
the other hand, seems to be a true item characteristic.
The four words at the top of the ﬁgure, which have the
highest proportions of reduced vowels, over 70 percent, all
showed signiﬁcant decreases in reduced vowels, as might be
expected. The is the only one of the four whose increase in
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

basic vowels is signiﬁcant, although the observed leftward
slants for of and to in the ﬁgure suggest stronger basic vowel
effects for them. The large sample size for the may be a
factor here. A, of, and to are among the less frequent of the
function words and their many reduced vowels leaves few
items to test basic vowel effects over (nϭ141, 156, and 209,
respectively͒. The signiﬁcant basic vowel effect for the
stands out in contrast, since its sample size is only modestly
higher (nϭ268).
And, which alone of the ten words has a relatively even
balance among the three vowel categories, shows the strongest effects of disﬂuency contexts for both reduced vowels
and basic vowels. Recall that it also has the highest rate of
occurrence next to disﬂuencies.10
The overall picture suggests that there is generally less
vowel reduction in the neighborhood of disﬂuencies, with the
unexplained exception of you, possibly diminished in
strength for items which already have few reduced vowels in
ﬂuent contexts. An increased number of basic vowels in disﬂuent contexts is clearly not general, and is likely to be a
word-speciﬁc characteristic. Since contextual selection of
lexical variants is an important source for variation between
basic and other full vowels, further examination of how this
differs for different words is warranted. Sorting out this and
other differences will clearly take much more detailed study
of the individual words and their contexts.
1. Initial disﬂuencies and and

Not only is and generally more frequent, longer, and
more likely to occur with disﬂuencies, it is much more likely
than the other words to occur in utterance-initial position,
making up 48 percent of the function words there ͑Sec.
VI A͒. This raises the question about the role of and in the
preference, suggested by earlier research, for disﬂuencies to
occur in initial positions.
Shriberg ͑1994͒, for example, showed that disﬂuencies
were more likely to occur sentence initially than sentence
medially, in three corpora ͑Switchboard, ATIS, and American
Express͒ (pϽ0.0001). In addition, Clark and Wasow ͑1998͒
suggested that disﬂuencies were more likely to occur at the
beginning of large constituents like clauses than at the beginning of smaller constituents like words or phrases. This
would presumably also result in a larger numbers of disﬂuencies in utterance-initial position. Results from our data on
utterance-initial position agree with Shriberg’s. After controlling for the variables mentioned in Sec. VI A below, we
found that initial words in Switchboard are more likely to be
disﬂuent than medial words (pϽ0.0001). More speciﬁcally,
ﬁlled and unﬁlled pauses ͑although not repetitions͒ are more
likely to occur after the ﬁrst word than after medial words
( pϽ0.0001). The greater likelihood of ﬁlled or unﬁlled
pauses after initial words was, however, only true for and.
For the other nine words, after removing the word and, there
was no effect of increased disﬂuency rate on initial words.
The rate of following disﬂuencies was the same for
utterance-initial words and for noninitial words, 13 percent.
Within our corpus the initial preference for disﬂuencies appears to be idiosyncratic to and. In a larger perspective it is
likely to be related to the frequent use of and as a discourse
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1013

TABLE VIII. Observed average durations ͑ms͒ of function words in ﬂuent and disﬂuent contexts. The number
of observations appears in parentheses. The values are based on a sample excluding items beginning or ending
a fragment, i.e., similar to the sample used in the regression analyses in this section.
Another word
Preceded by
Followed by

115
108

͑5694͒
͑5885͒

Silence
145
187

Filled pause

͑510͒
͑318͒

147
307

͑104͒
͑174͒

Repetition
201
186

͑155͒
͑132͒

marker. Discourse markers tend to occur initially in turns and
utterances ͑Schiffrin, 1987͒. Perhaps such initial discourse
markers tend to be followed by a ﬁlled or unﬁlled pause. A
very preliminary survey over the entire 38 000-word set of
Switchboard phonetic transcriptions supports this conjecture.
First, turn-initial words are more likely to be followed by
ﬁlled pauses or silence than noninitial words, 22 percent
compared to 16 percent. Second, the vast majority of the
initial disﬂuent words are words which frequently act as discourse markers. This suggests that the prevalence of silence
and ﬁlled pauses in initial positions may be a fact more about
discourse markers than about turn and utterance position.

͓ F(1,295)ϭ4.8, pϽ0.05͔ . One the other hand, it is still the
case that you shows no decrease in the frequency of reduced
vowels in disﬂuency contexts when the you know items are
excluded. It is true that the overall rate of reduced vowels is
decreased to 24 percent from 66 percent ͑cf. Fig. 5͒ by the
exclusion of you know. Since this is still well above the
levels of I, it, and that, it is not likely that a ﬂoor effect could
keep the presence of a disﬂuency from reducing it further, as
seems plausible for the lower reduced vowel rates of I, it,
and that. You’s vowel reduction behavior thus remains an
anomaly, all the more puzzling given the evident duration
effects.

2. The collocation you know

C. Differential effects of disﬂuency types

A number of characteristics of you stood out with respect to disﬂuencies: it was among the words most likely to
occur with disﬂuencies, it was much more likely to occur
after rather than before a disﬂuency than the other words, it
showed no lengthening effect after a disﬂuency, and it
showed no decrease of frequency of reduced vowels in disﬂuent contexts. All but the last of these can be attributed to
the frequent occurrence of you in the collocation you know.
This combination makes up 47 percent of the occurrences of
you in our data. Since most of these are lexicalized ﬁllers or
editing terms, it is not surprising that the form of you tends to
be reduced: you is about 25 percent shorter and about twice
as likely to have a reduced vowel in you know than in other
contexts.
You know itself very frequently occurs after a disﬂuency,
which contributes to the apparent high rate of occurrence of
you in disﬂuent contexts. Excluding you know, you is somewhat less likely than most of the function words to have a
neighboring disﬂuency. The predominance of occurrence of
you after rather than before disﬂuencies is partly an artifact
of you in you know being almost always coded as having no
following disﬂuency ͑pauses rarely separate the collocation͒,
and partly because of the frequent occurrence of you know
after a disﬂuency. In other contexts, you is only moderately
more likely to occur after rather than before a disﬂuency.
The shorter and more reduced forms of you in you know
obviously distorted the analyses of the effects of neighboring
disﬂuencies. The reduced you know’s will count as ﬂuent
items for the following position, and hence will exaggerate
the effect of a following disﬂuency. They will very frequently be among the disﬂuent items for the preceding position, and hence will dilute the effect of a previous disﬂuency.
Indeed, when you know items are excluded, the effect of
following disﬂuencies on duration is diminished, but it remains quite strong, especially considering the smaller sample
͓ F(1,296)ϭ14.0, pϭ0.0002͔ . And, without the you know
items, a preceding disﬂuency appears to lengthen you
1014

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

Does the effect of disﬂuent items on neighboring function words extend equally to each kind of disﬂuency that we
have considered? We address this question here mainly to be
assured that the effects described above are attributable in
some degree to all of the disﬂuencies, in keeping with their
assumed status as indicators of planning problems. The limitations of our database, which focuses on individual words in
a very local context, precludes any analysis of the structure
of disﬂuencies beyond the grossest details. One of the reasons for this is that disﬂuencies often are not simply silent
pauses, ﬁlled pauses, or repetitions, but larger events combining some or all of these, as well as editing terms, as this
Switchboard example shows:
...built up in um PAUSE in the PAUSE in the
PAUSE uh bureaucracy... .
Some of the more detailed questions about the form structure
´
of disﬂuencies are treated in O’Shaughnessy ͑1992͒, Plauche
and Shriberg ͑1999͒, and Shriberg ͑1994, 1999͒.
The observed average durations of function words in
ﬂuent and in different disﬂuent contexts are compared in
Table VIII. The signiﬁcances of duration differences reported
below are, however, based on regression analyses controlled
for the same variables described above. The durations for
ﬁlled pauses and for repetitions in Table VII cover only the
simple cases not combined with a silence.
When they precede a word, all three disﬂuency types
have a lengthening effect. The signiﬁcance of the effect is
least for ﬁlled pauses ͓ F(1,5449)ϭ11.0, pϽ0.001͔ . The
signiﬁcances of the other effects are pϽ0.0001. The lengthening effect of a repetition is stronger than the effect of silences and ﬁlled pauses ͓ F(1,6058)ϭ34.1, pϽ0.0001͔ . The
effects of silences and ﬁlled pauses do not differ signiﬁcantly.
All three types also have a lengthening effect when they
follow a word. Again, the effect is weakest, but nevertheless
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

highly signiﬁcant, for ﬁlled pauses ͓ F(1,5756)ϭ20.9,
pϽ0.0001͔ . There are no signiﬁcant differences between the
effects of the different disﬂuencies, in spite of the apparently
much longer durations before ﬁlled pauses.
D. Discussion

Function words which are preceded by or followed by
disﬂuencies are longer and are more likely to have full vowels than words in ﬂuent contexts. These effects are robust; all
ten function words are longer when followed by disﬂuencies,
and eight of ten when preceded by disﬂuencies. Effects on
basic vowel frequency and coda presence, on the other hand,
appear to depend on the lexical item or possibly, in the case
of coda presence, the identity of the coda obstruent. Disﬂuencies after a word affect the word’s form more strongly than
disﬂuencies before a word. Preceding and following disﬂuencies tend to co-occur, and when they do, their effects are
multiplicative. Finally, all three disﬂuency types have a
lengthening effect.
V. WORD PREDICTABILITY FROM NEIGHBORING
WORDS

In earlier work ͑Jurafsky et al., 2001; Gregory et al.,
1999͒ we proposed the probabilistic reduction hypothesis:
words are more reduced when they are more predictable or
probable. In this section we focus on the extent to which the
probability of a word given neighboring words affects reduction. There are many ways to measure the probability of a
word. The simplest measure, prior probability, can be estimated from the relative frequency of the word in a sufﬁciently large corpus. The fact that the 10 words in this dataset
were all very frequent, however, limited our ability to study
relative frequency. The 3-to-1 range of frequency of the
words is very small compared to the overall ratio of probability of about 100 000 to 1 for the highest and lowest frequency words in the entire 38 000-word phonetically transcribed portion of Switchboard. What variation there is,
moreover, is inextricably confounded with the effects of
form and patterns of combination of the individual items.
Consequently, one cannot make useful inferences about the
effects of relative frequency with the function words dataset.
We therefore limit our focus to the effect of neighboring
words on predictability. Consider ﬁrst the predictability of a
word given the previous word. We use two measures of this.
One is the joint probability of the two words P(w iϪ1 w i ).
The joint probability may be thought of as the prior probability of the two words taken together, and is estimated from the
relative frequency of the two words together in a corpus.
This is computed by counting the number of times the two
words occur together, C(w iϪ1 w i ), and dividing by N, the
number of words in the corpus
P ͑ w iϪ1 w i ͒ ϭ

C ͑ w iϪ1 w i ͒
.
N

͑1͒

This is a variant of what Krug ͑1998͒ called the string frequency of the two words.
Used alone, joint probability is not an entirely satisfactory measure of word predictability. Pairs of words can have
a high joint probability merely because the individual words
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

are of high frequency ͑e.g., of the͒. But a word can occur
infrequently, yet be very predictable every time it occurs.
Thus most measures of predictability are based on metrics
like conditional probability or mutual information which
control for the frequencies of one or both of the words ͑Man¨
ning and Schutze, 1999͒. The second metric we use in this
paper is such a metric: the conditional probability of a word
given the previous word. This is also sometimes called the
transitional probability ͑Saffran et al., 1996b; Bush, 1999͒.
The conditional probability of a particular target word w i
given a previous word w iϪ1 is estimated by counting the
number of times the two words occur together C(w iϪ1 w i ),
and dividing by C(w iϪ1 ), the occurrences of the ﬁrst word
P ͑ w i ͉ w iϪ1 ͒ ϭ

C ͑ w iϪ1 w i ͒
.
C ͑ w iϪ1 ͒

͑2͒

In addition to considering the preceding word, the effect
of the following word may be measured by the two corresponding probabilities. The joint probability of a word with
the next word p(w i w iϩ1 ) is estimated from the relative frequency of the two words together
P ͑ w i w iϩ1 ͒ ϭ

C ͑ w i w iϩ1 ͒
.
N

͑3͒

Similarly, the conditional probability of the target word
given the next word p(w i ͉ w iϩ1 ) is the probability of the
target word w i given the next word w iϩ1 . This measures the
predictability of a word given the next word the speaker is
about to say, and is estimated by
P ͑ w i ͉ w iϩ1 ͒ ϭ

C ͑ w i w iϩ1 ͒
.
C ͑ w iϩ1 ͒

͑4͒

As we see below, while conditional probabilities are the
most consistent of these factors affecting reduction, joint
probabilities and the relative frequencies of surrounding
words also contribute additional effects. It is thus helpful to
consider their relationship with the conditional probabilities.
The fundamental relationship among them is given by
P ͑ w i͉ w x ͒ ϭ

P͑ w iw x ͒
,
P͑ wx͒

͑5͒

where w x denotes either the preceding or the following word.
͑This can be derived from the deﬁnitions above.͒ Since we
use log probabilities as factors in the regressions to assess
effects, conditional probability as a single factor with weight
B (Bϫlog conditional probability͒ is the same as the combination (Bϫlog joint probability)Ϫ(Bϫlog relative frequency of the neighboring word͒. We can thus think about
the conditional probability as combining the effects of joint
probability and the relative frequency of the neighboring
word under the simple assumption that they have equal ͑but
opposite͒ weights. If we ﬁnd that either joint probability or
neighboring relative frequency ͓but not both; by Eq. ͑5͒ any
third term of the three is redundant͔ contributes an additional
effect, this tells us that the assumption of equal weights is
incorrect, and that the combined effect of the probabilities is
more complex. Since any two of the three probabilities in ͑5͒
capture all of the predictability effects of a neighboring
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1015

TABLE IX. Summary of probabilistic measures and high probability examples.
Measure
Joint of target with next word
Joint of target with previous
Conditional of target given
previous
Conditional of target given
next
Conditional of target given
surrounding

Deﬁnition

Examples

p(w i w iϩ1 )
p(w iϪ1 w i )
p(w i ͉ w iϪ1 )

you know, I think
and I, in the
rid of, kind of

p(w i ͉ w iϩ1 )

I do, you know

p(w i ͉ w iϪ1 ¯w iϩ1 )

matter of fact

word, we have somewhat arbitrarily chosen to examine the
conditional probabilities and the joint probabilities. Where
both probabilities signiﬁcantly affect reduction, we interpret
the joint probability effect as either an indication that the
joint probability is more heavily weighted than the neighboring word’s relative frequency ͑in the case of less reduction
with higher joint probabilities͒ or an indication that it is the
relative frequency that is to be more heavily weighted ͑when
there is more reduction with higher joint probabilities͒.
Table IX contains a summary of the probabilistic measures and some examples of high probability items from the
dataset for each measure.
Other more complex conditional probabilities, often
called trigram probability measures, played a smaller role in
the analysis. Two of these were the conditional probability of
the target given the two previous words p(w i ͉ w iϪ2 w iϪ1 ),
and the conditional probability of the target given the two
following words p(w i ͉ w iϩ1 w iϩ2 ). Neither of these turned
out to have any effect on word forms. The other is the conditional probability of the target given the two surrounding
words p(w i ͉ w iϪ1 ¯w iϩ1 ), estimated as follows:
P ͑ w i ͉ w iϪ1 ¯w iϩ1 ͒ ϭ

C ͑ w iϪ1 w i w iϩ1 ͒
.
C ͑ w iϪ1 ¯w iϩ1 ͒

͑6͒

We have also considered the mutual information ͑Fano,
1961͒ of the target word and the neighboring words in Gregory et al. ͑1999͒. There we showed that mutual information
produces very similar results to the conditional probability of
the target word given the neighboring word.
The actual computation for estimating these probabilities is somewhat more complex than the simple explanations
above. Since the 38 000-word ICSI corpus is far too small to
estimate word probabilities, they are estimated from the 2.4
million-word Switchboard corpus instead. We trained these
probabilities via three separate stochastic grammars: a regular bigram grammar ͑conditioned on previous word͒, a reverse bigram grammar ͑conditioned on following word͒, and
a centered trigram grammar. The counts were smoothed by
Katz backoff with Good–Turing discounting ͑Jurafsky and
Martin ͑2000͒, pp. 214 –219, and references therein͒.
A. Effects of predictability

The main results that are reported in the following sections are based on regressions with the control variables
listed above in Sec. III F, the preceding/following disﬂuency
variables described in Sec. IV, and the relevant interactions
among these variables. The reported results are based on a
1016

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

sample that excludes fragment-initial and fragment-ﬁnal
items, leaving a total sample of 6219 items. Separate analyses, which we do not report in detail, veriﬁed that adding
additional control variables for the effects of prosodic position would not have materially changed the results. We thus
chose not to use the smaller sample of some 4800 items of
the ICSI corpus segmented by the LDC into sentence-like
domains. See Secs. VI and VI A below for a fuller explanation of this sample and its prosodic coding. No analysis of
predictability effects on basic vowel frequency or coda presence was attempted, partly because of the reduced sample
sizes for those variables, and partly because they would reveal less about general effects of predictability, since their
behavior varies much more from word to word.
1. Word duration

The predictability factors having the strongest effects on
word duration are the conditional probabilities of the target
word. As can be seen in Table X, both the conditional probability given the previous word p(w i ͉ w iϪ1 ) and the conditional probability of the target word given the following
word p(w i ͉ w iϩ1 ) are highly signiﬁcant factors. Target words
which are more predictable are shorter. That is, the higher the
conditional probability of the target given either of the neighboring words, the shorter the target word, as indicated by the
effect magnitudes less than 1.0 in Table X. The shortening
ratios used to measure effect magnitudes can be made more
concrete by applying them to tokens which have typical values for other variables. This yields durations predicted by the
regression models which include the other variables, as opposed to observed average durations, which are uncontrolled.
Such words, if they are highly probable given the previous
word ͑at the 95th percentile of the conditional probability͒,
have a predicted duration of 90 ms; low conditional probability tokens ͑at the 5th percentile͒ have a predicted duration of
109 ms. The duration of words is affected similarly by their
probability given the following word: highly probable tokens
have a predicted duration of 86 ms; tokens with a low probability given the following word have a predicted duration of
116 ms.
There are also signiﬁcant additional effects of the joint
probabilities with previous and following words. When
words have a higher joint probability with the following
word, they are longer. This effect is in the opposite direction
than the one we ﬁnd with the conditional probabilities, and to
some extent counterbalances the shortening effect of the conditional probability. In contrast, words with a higher joint
probability with the previous word are shorter, affecting duration in the same way as the conditional probability. Moreover, there is a signiﬁcant interaction between conditional
probability given the previous word and joint probability
with the previous word. This interaction captures some of the
ways that the effects are uneven over the range of probabilities: joint probability has a shortening effect only for tokens
whose conditional probability is above the median; and the
shortening effect of conditional probability is greater for
higher joint probabilities.
Thus predictability effects of the previous word and of
the following word are similar in that both conditional probBell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

TABLE X. Signiﬁcances and magnitudes of effects of predictability variables on word duration and frequency
of full vowels. The signiﬁcance of each variable is obtained by adding it to a comparison regression model. The
comparison model consists of the control variables for the preceding and following conditional probabilities; of
the control variables plus the corresponding conditional probability for the joint probabilities; control variables
plus the preceding conditional and joint probabilities for the interaction; and control variables plus all the other
probability variables for the centered conditional probability. The values of F thus have degrees of freedom
between F(1,6197) and F(1,6202). The effect magnitudes are ratios of length and ratios of odds of full vowels.
They are estimated by evaluating the coefﬁcients of the variables in the full regression equation over the range
between the 5th and 95th percentiles of each variable. Effects for previous conditional and joint probabilities
include the interaction, evaluated at median values of the variables.
Duration
Predictability
variable
Conditional of target given previous
Joint of target with previous
Previous conditionalϫjoint interaction
Conditional of target given next
Joint of target with next
Conditional of target given surrounding

F

Signiﬁcance
p

88.4
43.7
58.7
186.0
41.6
20.4

Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001

abilities have shortening effects; they differ in that higher
joint probability with the previous word shortens a word, but
higher joint probability with following word lengthens it. In
addition, no interaction was found between the previous
word probabilities and following word probabilities.11
One further conditional probability affects word durations in addition to the variables above—the conditional
probability of the word given both the previous and following words. Like the other conditional probabilities, tokens
with higher conditional probabilities are shorter, but the effect is somewhat less. The predicted duration of tokens with
high probabilities is 95 ms, whereas that of tokens with low
probabilities is 104 ms. No signiﬁcant contributions of probabilities were found involving the word before the previous
word or the word following the following word ͑i.e., using
the other trigram conditional probabilities described above͒.
In other words, we are able to discern only strictly local
probability effects, limited to the interaction of a word with
the word next to it.
2. Vowel reduction

Neighboring word predictabilities affect vowel reduction
in much the same way as they do word length. The conditional probability given the previous word and given the following word are both strongly associated with higher frequencies of reduction. The predicted likelihood of a full
vowel in words which were highly predictable from the following word ͑at the 95th percentile of conditional probability͒ was 0.43, whereas the likelihood of a full vowel in low
predictability words ͑at the 5th percentile͒ was 0.73. The
predicted likelihoods for words with high and low predictability from the previous word were very similar, 0.43 and
0.72, respectively.
Again, there are also strong effects of the joint probabilities with previous and following words. For vowel reduction,
however, a higher joint probability in either direction is associated with less reduction. Words with higher joint probabilities with either the previous or the following word are
more likely to have full vowels, counterbalancing the reducJ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

Full vowel proportion
Effect

␹ 2 (1)

Signiﬁcance
p

0.80
0.94

92.9
55.2
20.4
22.3
272.8
2.9

Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
Ͻ0.0001
0.09

0.72
1.20
0.91

Effect
0.24
2.44
0.27
5.39

tion effect of the conditional probabilities. As with duration,
the interaction between conditional probability given the previous word and joint probability with the previous word is
highly signiﬁcant, reﬂecting the same sort of variation in
magnitude of effects that was described above for duration.
No signiﬁcant additional effect was found from the preceding and the following words together. As with duration,
there were no interaction effects between previous and following word predictability variables, nor were there any effects due to predictabilities involving words before the previous word or after the following word.
3. Interdependence of duration and vowel reduction

The strong effects of predictability on both shortening
and on vowel reduction suggest that there may be separate
sources for the two effects. Perhaps vowel reduction stems
mainly from some sort of categorical choice in lexical production between full and reduced vowels, whereas shortening is mainly the result of gradient, noncategorical modiﬁcations at the level of phonetic encoding or of execution of the
articulatory plans.12 It is possible, however, that the shortening effects that we observe for function words might be
solely a consequence of the vowel reduction effects, since
reduced vowels are shorter than full vowels. If this were true,
there might be no evidence for a gradient affect of probability on reduction. In order to test whether the effects of probability on shortening were completely due to vowel reduction, we added the full versus reduced vowel variable to the
base model for duration as a control.
The probabilistic variables remain signiﬁcant predictors
of duration after controlling for vowel reduction. The vowel
reduction variable of course accounts for a considerable
amount of the duration variance ͑14.5 percent͒, so there
should be less for the predictability variables to account for.
Indeed, the predictability variables account for 3.8 percent of
the variance in duration overall, but 2.6 percent of the variance in duration controlled for reduction. Nevertheless, except for the joint probability with the following word, all the
individual predictability variables remain highly signiﬁcant
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1017

TABLE XI. Signiﬁcances of the effects of predictability variables on individual function words. Effects with signiﬁcances above 0.01 are in boldface.
Effect on

a

the

in

of

to

and

that

I

it

you

Duration by conditional given following
Duration by conditional given previous
Duration by joint with previous
Reduced vowel by conditional given following
Reduced vowel by conditional given
previous duration

Ë0.05
0.05
ns
ns
ns

Ͻ0.001
Ͻ0.001
0.02
ns
ns

Ͻ0.0001
ns
ns
0.0002
Ë0.05

ns
ns
Ͻ0.0001
ns
ns

Ͻ0.0001
0.0002
Ͻ0.01
0.0005
ns

ns
ns
ns
ns
Ͻ0.0005

Ͻ0.0001
ns
ns
ns
ns

ns
ns
ns
ns
Ë0.05

Ͻ0.005
Ë0.02
Ë0.05
ns
ns

Ͻ0.0001
ns
ns
Ͻ0.0001
ns

at levels of pϽ0.0001. Predictability not only affects
whether vowels are reduced or not, but it has an additional
noncategorical effect on word duration.
Further conﬁrmation results from an examination of the
words with full and with reduced vowels separately, to see
whether predictability shortening affects full vowels as well
as reduced vowels. Even with the smaller subsamples, the
probability variables remain highly signiﬁcant at levels of
pϽ0.0001, with a few exceptions. The joint probability with
the following word is a signiﬁcant factor for reduced vowels
(pϽ0.005), but not for full vowels (pϭ0.15); and conditional probability given the previous word is only marginally
signiﬁcant for full vowels (pϽ0.01). We also veriﬁed that
the possibly categorical deletion of ﬁnal obstruents in the
words and, it, of, and that did not account for the predictability effects on duration within the reduced and full vowel
subsamples.
B. Variability of predictability effects by word

Individual analyses of the function words show that each
word’s duration is affected by one or more of the predictability variables. Table XI summarizes the effects on both duration and vowel reduction for the conditional probabilities
given the previous word and given the following word. It
also includes the effect on duration of the joint probability
with the previous word. The most general effect is that of the
conditional probability given the following word, affecting
the duration of six of the words. The words showing no
effect or only a marginal effect of this variable, a, of, and,
and I, are scattered across functional categories and include
both high- and low-frequency words. Thus it does not seem
possible either to attribute the pattern of effects to limitations
to particular classes of words or to attribute the exceptions
generally to a lack of sensitivity of the analysis due to small
sample sizes. The predictability variables involving the previous word clearly affect the, of, and to. In addition, the
interaction between the conditional probability given the previous word and the joint probability with the previous word
is a signiﬁcant factor for ﬁve of the words. These include of
and to, indicating that the conditional probability affects the
duration of the word more when it occurs in a frequent combination with a previous word. The interaction is also a factor for in and I, suggesting that, although neither the conditional nor the joint probability is signiﬁcant alone, that there
may be an effect of the conditional probability for frequent
combinations. Finally, there are marginal effects on duration
of the bilateral conditional probability given previous and
following words for a, and, that, and to, with signiﬁcance
values ranging from Ͻ0.01 to Ͻ0.05. As for vowel reduction
1018

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

effects, it is evident that they are less general than those for
duration. This parallels the pattern found for lengthening in
disﬂuency contexts.
Overall, these results conﬁrm the hypothesis that words
in more predictable contexts have more reduced forms, since
an effect for some predictability variable was found for each
of the function words. On the other hand, the considerable
variation in the strength of the effects ͑possibly none in some
cases͒ underscores the importance of the interaction of each
word’s attributes with predictability. The hallmark of function words is that they are markers of particular pragmatic,
semantic, and syntactic functions, and that they occur in particular classes of constructions. The kinds of constructions
they occur in is bound to affect whether it is predominantly
predictability from the left, from the right, or from both that
they are subject to. Moreover, their occurrence in certain
very frequent constructions may strongly inﬂuence the appearance of their overall sensitivity to predictability, since
those constructions will necessarily be highly predictable
contexts. While we do not explore these interesting connections here in detail, the discussions of high frequency uses of
and and you that follow illustrate some of the interactions of
a word’s idiosyncratic behavior with predictability.
1. And in binomial constructions

One of the very frequent uses of and is as a conjunction
to create binomial constructions such as trucks and stuff,
lockers and everything. This immediately suggests a connection with the pattern of predictability effects on and discussed above, namely that and was one of few words to be
affected by bilateral conditional probability ͑given both previous and following words͒. A very preliminary check conﬁrms this. A fairly broad binomial category was coded by
hand, which included modiﬁed and unmodiﬁed words, and
adjectives and verbs as well as nouns. Excluding disﬂuent
contexts, and is signiﬁcantly shorter in binomials than elsewhere ͓ t(460)ϭ3.65, pϽ0.0001͔ . Furthermore, within binomials, and is signiﬁcantly shorter when it is more predictable from the two surrounding words, whereas the bilateral
conditional probability has no effect on the duration of and
in its other occurrences.
2. You know and predictability

Recall from Sec. IV B 2 that 47 percent of the occurrences of you are in the collocation you know, and that in this
context it is shorter and more likely to have a reduced vowel
than in other contexts. You in you know is shorter ͑by about
25 ms͒ and much more likely to have a reduced vowel ͑50
percent compared to 24 percent͒ than you in other contexts.
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

The high frequency of the combination necessarily means
that the predictability of you from following know is unusually high, 12.6 times other contexts. Its predictability from
the preceding word, on the other hand, is lower, 0.42 times
other contexts. This is presumably a consequence of ﬁllers
and editing terms occurring across a wide range of contexts,
and hence being relatively unpredictable in any particular
context. Recall from Table XI that you is strongly affected by
predictability from the previous word, but little or not at all
by the following word. The obvious question is whether this
simply reﬂects the asymmetry of the you know combination,
or whether it is more general. In contrast to the binomial and
case, the results were little changed after excluding you
know: You is shorter and more likely to have a reduced vowel
when it is more predictable from the following word, but
shows no effects of the predictability from the preceding
word.
C. Discussion

Words that are more predictable are shorter and more
likely to have reduced vowels, conﬁrming the probabilistic
reduction hypothesis introduced above. The conditional
probability of the target word given the preceding word and
given the following both play a role, in both duration and
vowel reduction. The magnitudes of the duration effects are
fairly substantial, in the order of 20 ms or more, or about 20
percent, over the range of the conditional probabilities ͑excluding the highest and lowest 5 percent of the items͒. The
joint probabilities of the target words given the preceding
and following words also played a role in reduction, as did
the bilateral conditional probability of the target word given
the two surrounding words. The local nature of the predictability variables is underscored by the lack of any effect
involving words more than one word distant from the target
word. The failure to ﬁnd effects for all the probability variables on all the function words is possibly partly due to the
smaller sample sizes, but the overall spotty pattern of effects
indicates that there are real differences among the words.
This sort of variation conﬁrms the expectation that one
source of the probability effects is the collocation of the
function words in particular constructions. Are frequent collocations, perhaps semilexicalized, the only or primary
source of the predictability observed here?
The answer seems to be no. In an earlier study ͑Jurafsky
et al., 2001͒, we showed that higher predictability is associated with increased reduction even in word combinations
that are not lexicalized. We did this by looking at words with
relatively low conditional probabilities, and showing that the
effects of predictability from the preceding word hold not
only for the more predictable cases, as would be expected if
frequent collocations are the source of the effects, but also
for the less predictable cases, which are unlikely to be lexicalized.
The fact that the effects of predictability on duration add
to the effects on vowel reduction, and affect both full and
reduced vowels, indicates that some of the effects of predictability on reduction are continuous and noncategorical. It is
reasonable to conclude that predictability effects are not limited to lexical choice and combination at semantic and phoJ. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

nological form levels, so that the domains of applicability of
the probabilistic reduction hypothesis include linguistic levels that allow continuous speciﬁcation of phonetic form.
VI. THE POSITION OF A WORD IN PROSODIC
DOMAINS

The location of a word in larger prosodic domains such
as utterances, turns, intonational phrases, and phonological
phrases plays an important role in reduction. Studies of language change and of pronunciation variation have long accepted three main effects—ﬁnal lengthening ͑Klatt, 1975;
Ladd and Campbell, 1991; Crystal and House, 1990, inter
alia͒ initial strengthening ͑i.e., more extreme articulation͒
͑Fougeron and Keating, 1997; Byrd et al., 2000, inter alia͒,
and ﬁnal weakening ͑i.e., less extreme articulation͒ ͑Browman and Goldstein, 1992; Hock, 1986͒. During the last several decades more and more quantitative studies have helped
make our understanding of these general effects more precise; see Fougeron and Keating ͑1997͒ for a review. Many of
these results, however, derive from laboratory paradigms like
reiterant speech, and have not been tested on natural speech
production or over a wide range of lexical, prosodic, and
pragmatic contexts. Furthermore, it has been difﬁcult to tease
apart prepausal lengthening from lengthening at the edge of
prosodic domains.
To evaluate the effect that position in prosodic domains
plays on function word reduction in conversational speech,
as well as to control for positional effects in the analysis of
other variables, we examine a word’s position in an
utterance-like domain. The domain we chose had already
been transcribed for a large proportion of the Switchboard
corpus by the Linguistic Data Consortium ͑LDC͒ ͑Meteer
et al., 1995͒, following the segmentation guidelines in Shriberg ͑1994͒. We use the term utterance for this LDC domain;
Meteer et al. ͑1995͒ called them ‘‘slash units.’’ In general,
these units are intended to model the sentence-like units
which often make up spoken conversation, and hence are
deﬁned with respect to both syntactic coherence and an attempt at approximating large intonation boundaries. While
this use of syntactic coherence as a heuristic for intonation
boundaries is clearly inferior to a prosodic transcription of
speech, the fact that grammatical boundaries and intonational
boundaries are highly correlated ͑Croft, 1995͒ makes this
methodological simpliﬁcation less problematic.
The utterances include complete syntactic sentences.
͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒
͑iv͒

I, I have strong objections to that.
And that’s not fair.
Where, where are you?
And, uh, I thought of those two things when I was, I
was holding for a long time.

as well as phrases which function as complete turns
͑i͒
͑ii͒
͑iii͒

And, uh, until next time.
A pop-up trailer, huh?
The news.

In most cases an utterance was contained inside a single
turn. Sometimes, however, an utterance was interrupted by a
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1019

TABLE XII. Duration and vowel reduction values for function words which
are in initial position in the utterance, in ﬁnal position, or in medial position
͑noninitial, non-ﬁnal͒.
Initial
Duration ͑ms͒
Vowel reduction

Medial

Final

173
82.3%

125
57.4%

200
93.2%

backchannel such as uh-huh, or another remark from the interlocutor. In such cases, as in the following example, A’s
speech was counted as one utterance; thus, the word and is
counted as utterance initial, but the word here is not.
A: And, and I get mail
B: Uh-huh.
A: here at home under each of those names.
Larger turns are generally broken into utterances at syntactic boundaries which correlated with intonation boundaries.
B: And, uh, I never really, messed with anything, uh,
gardening or anything like that until now,
B: but, uh, I, I keep hearing all the stories of, of different
parts of town.
Readers interested in more details of the deﬁnition of
utterances and the procedures followed by the LDC coders
should see the coders’ manual ͑Meteer et al., 1995͒.
In general, utterance boundaries and turn boundaries
were very highly correlated, as would be expected. For this
reason, we did not examine turn-boundary position separately from utterance-boundary position. The edges of the
LDC utterances should generally correspond with edges of
intonational phrases ͑and also with edges of smaller units
such as phonological phrases͒, whereas their interiors will
sometimes contain words that are edges of intonational
phrases as well as those of smaller units. Consequently, if
utterance-edge strengthening effects are found, such results
should be conservative.
A. Effect of utterance position

About two-thirds of the ICSI data had LDC utteranceboundary labels, so that 4777 observations were available for
the analysis of utterance position.13 Table XII shows observed values for duration and reduction in initial, medial,
and ﬁnal positions.
These observed differences, however, may not be valid
indications of the effect of position in the prosodic domain,
since other factors affecting the form of words might be systematically associated with prosodic positions. For example,
Shriberg ͑1994͒ found that initial words are more likely to
occur in the context of disﬂuencies. Since disﬂuencies cause
words to be longer, this may exaggerate the actual effect of
initial position. Initial position may have different kinds of
segmental or accentual contexts than noninitial words, and
may also be predictable in different ways. Pauses, which
may be likely to occur after utterance-ﬁnal position, would
exaggerate the effect of ﬁnal position. We therefore evaluated the effect of position in regression models after controlling for the factors listed in Secs. IV and V ͑and relevant
interactions͒.
1020

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

After controlling for all factors except predictability
variables from the preceding word, initial words are longer
than noninitial words ͓ F(1,4639)ϭ30.1, pϽ0.0001͔ . Initial
words are also more likely to have a full ͑unreduced͒ vowel
than noninitial words ͓ ␹ 2 (1)ϭ192.9, pϽ0.0001͔ . Conditional and joint probabilities with the preceding word were
omitted from these analyses partly because they have no
meaningful interpretation at the beginning of fragments, and
if fragment-initial items were eliminated, the utterance-initial
items would be halved, reducing the power of the analysis.
There is a more fundamental consideration, however.
Low predictability is an expected characteristic of utteranceinitial words, and can be expected to mask the effect of utterance position. This is the case. There remains no additional effect of initial position after adding the predictability
variables as controls (pϭ0.16). ͑This analysis is based on
the smaller subcorpus that excludes the fragment-initial
items for which the predictability variables are not deﬁned.͒
Low predictability, however, might well be considered to be
an inherent characteristic of the position. This makes it unclear whether it is even appropriate to control for predictability. Analytically, the predictability variables mask the initial
position effect, but the proper interpretation of this result
awaits a deeper understanding of the interaction of predictability and prosodic domains than we possess.
Final position has long been known to play a role in
lengthening ͑Klatt, 1975; Ladd and Campbell, 1991; Crystal
and House, 1990, inter alia͒. As Table XII shows, the observed durations for ﬁnal words are longer. After controlling
for all factors except predictability variables from the following word, utterance-ﬁnal words are longer than medial words
͓ F(1,3992)ϭ25.5, pϽ0.0001͔ . They are also more likely to
have unreduced vowels ͓ ␹ 2 (1)ϭ7.8, pϭ0.005͔ . The
utterance-ﬁnal effect is not as sensitive to the masking from
conditional and joint probabilities with the following word—
utterance-ﬁnal words are still longer ͓ F(1,3721)ϭ12.7, p
Ͻ0.0005͔ , and more likely to have unreduced vowels
͓ ␹ 2 (1)ϭ7.7, pϽ0.01͔ when controlled for these probabilities within fragments. Under those conditions, the estimated
lengthening factor of ﬁnal position is 1.23; and a word which
occurred with a full vowel 60 percent of the time in medial
position would have an estimated frequency of occurring
with a full vowel in ﬁnal position of 81 percent.
We do not report on the effect of position on the percentage of basic vowels or of coda deletion. Both these measures seem to be strongly affected by individual items. The
results are difﬁcult to interpret, but probably reﬂect speciﬁc
high-frequency combinations of the function words with
other words.
B. Variability of position effects by word

The ﬁnal lengthening effect applies very generally; all
ten function words are longer at the end of utterances. In
contrast, only ﬁve words, a, and, it, that, and the have longer
durations at the beginning of utterances than medially.
In addition, utterance-initial position is overwhelmingly
dominated by the function words and and I—and makes up
48 percent, and I 32 percent of the function words in that
position. Recall that and is also the longest of the function
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

words ͑Sec. III E͒. Is the combination of and’s length and
frequent occurrence in initial position responsible for the
utterance-initial lengthening effect above? Excluding and, an
effect, although somewhat weaker, remains ͓ F(1,4078)
ϭ6.8, pϽ0.001͔ . In addition, and alone shows a signiﬁcant
initial effect ͓ F(1,544)ϭ6.0, pϽ0.02͔ . On the other hand,
there is no effect for I ͓ F(1,794)Ͻ1 ͔ . Thus, in contrast to
our ﬁnding ͑Sec. IV B 1͒ that the association between initial
position and disﬂuencies is limited to and, we conclude that
the initial lengthening effect is not an artifact of the disproportionate number of longer ands initially, but applies more
generally. The bias introduced by and simply exaggerates the
general effect. The lack of an effect for I, however, indicates
that there is no or little initial lengthening effect for some
words, presumably due to idiosyncratic properties that we
have not explored.
C. Discussion

The high-frequency function words studied here are
longer and more likely to have full vowels at the beginning
and end of the utterance-like domains coded by the LDC.
Our results thus show that previous results on prosodic edge
effects in laboratory speech ͑Fougeron and Keating, 1997,
inter alia͒ can be extended to more natural conversational
data. In addition, we found this lengthening after controlling
for many contextual factors, including ﬁnal pauses. This suggests that lengthening at prosodic edges plays a distinct role
from prepausal lengthening. Initial strengthening is strongly
associated with predictability from the previous word in
ways whose understanding requires further research.
VII. CONCLUSIONS

Our results show that disﬂuencies, predictability, and utterance position all play strong and independent roles in
whether a word is reduced, for all measures of reduction.
While our regression study does not constitute a model in
itself, these three results each have important implications
for modeling of human lexical representation and production. First, a key result is that planning problems, as measured by disﬂuencies either preceding or following a function word, play a strong role in the word being longer and
less reduced. This extends the results of Fox Tree and Clark
͑1997͒ on the to other function words. On the other hand,
their suggestion that the basic form /Zi/ may signal a disﬂuency appears to be lexically speciﬁc, since we found increases in basic vowel frequencies in disﬂuent contexts only
for the, and, and it. More crucially, the inﬂuence of planning
problems is extended to duration, a nonphonological measure of reduction, which appears to hold generally for all the
words examined.
Second, the result that function words are reduced when
they are highly probable given neighboring words lends evidence to probabilistic models of human language processing
͑Jurafsky, 1996; Saffran et al., 1996a; Seidenberg and MacDonald, 1999͒. While some of this reduction may be due to
lexicalization of multiword phrases, some of it is due to the
mental representation of some kind of probabilistic links between words, since the effects are not limited to frequent
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

collocations. Previous work has focused on the role of probability in comprehension. Our work shows how probability
can play a related role in production.
Our results on probability also extend the work of Grifﬁn and Bock ͑1998͒, who showed that interactions between
predictability and frequency argue for what they called cascade theories of word production, and against discrete twostage models of word production. In discrete two-stage models ͑Jescheniak and Levelt, 1994; Levelt et al., 1999͒, the
predictability of a word in context can help cause a word to
be selected. But word selection is simply binary; once a word
is selected, the amount of contextual predictability does not
play a role in phonological encoding. By contrast, cascade
theories ͑Dell, 1986; Stemberger, 1985͒ allow the amount of
evidence causing a word to be selected to be passed to lower
levels in word production. Our results show that highly predictable words are shorter even after controlling for reduction or deletion at the phonological level. This suggests that
the extent to which the context predicts a word cannot just
play a role at lexical selection or during the compilation of
syntactic and prosodic frames. Predictability ͑and probably
also some disﬂuency effects͒ must also make its way down
to the level of articulatory routines.
Third, our results show that utterance-initial and
utterance-ﬁnal words are longer and less likely to be reduced
than utterance-medial words. Since the effect of utterance
position was signiﬁcant even after controlling for pauses, our
results show that ﬁnal lengthening in conversational speech
is an attribute of the prosodic or syntactic boundary condition itself, and not of the correlated presence of pauses at
boundaries. On the other hand, while ﬁnal lengthening is a
separate effect from any lengthening from lower predictabilities in ﬁnal position, a parallel separation of position and
predictability for utterance-initial position was not found.
This raises the question of the proper interpretation of the
interaction of predictability from neighboring words and
phrasal edges, that is, whether they should be considered
separate but strongly associated sources of form variation, or
whether the typically low predictability of words at phrasal
edges should be regarded as an intrinsic attribute of the position.
Most contextual effects in speech, like assimilation, are
strongest next to their source. The factors studied here are no
exception, all being local in nature, involving the immediately previous or following word or an immediately previous
or following utterance boundary. This is partly because the
strategy of looking for effects in the most likely circumstances dictated that such contexts be examined ﬁrst. Even
so, there was no additional advantage of considering predictability from the previous pair of words instead of just the
previous word, and similarly for predictability from following words. ͑And while we did not analyze utterance-second
position, the observed average duration of words in second
position did not differ from those in the other medial positions.͒ This does not mean that there are no effects of the sort
considered here that are more global in nature. One example
is the shortening of repeated words in a discourse reported by
Fowler and Housum ͑1987͒, although this is unlikely to be
an important factor for very high-frequency words, since
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1021

they are repetitions most of the time. But the strength of the
local effects, together with the suggestions that there may be
at least a sharp drop in the inﬂuence of more distant factors,
indicates that the local-global dimension of effects deserves
closer attention, both for its contribution to the structure of
production models as well as its signiﬁcance for speech processing applications.
Our results also have some implications for lexical representation, suggesting that multiple lexical representations
of high-frequency function words may be more numerous
than models of speech production have usually assumed. For
example, in addition to the more commonly noticed allomorphy of the and a, allomorphic models should also be considered for at least to, of, and and. Furthermore, the selection of
these variants is sensitive to a wide range of factors, notably
the activities of monitoring and repair. Integrating the effects
of rate, style, segmental context, and prosodic context on the
durations and forms of the word is also readily compatible
with the models and concepts of gestural phonology ͑Browman and Goldstein, 1992͒.
Our results also have important implications for automatic speech recognition. Few of the factors that we show
affect pronunciation variation are captured in current recognizers. Many of them could conceivably be added. FoslerLussier ͑1999a, 1999b͒ has shown ﬁrst steps in this direction
by showing how to build dynamic lexicons which are sensitive to speaking rate and the predictability of target words
from previous words. These models could be extended to
deal with predictability given following words. Similarly,
planning problems could be handled with relatively simple
modiﬁcations such as repetition detection and the use of a
silence phone. The fact that there are key factors in reduction
that are strictly local holds out the hope that good predictive
models of word pronunciation may be based only on local
information. We feel that these are promising directions for
future investigations of ASR pronunciation models.
Much, of course, remains to be worked out in understanding the role of predictability in reduction. In addition to
the exact locus of predictability in the cognitive processes
involved in speech production, we still do not understand the
complex interactions between conditional probabilities, joint
probabilities, and item effects. Furthermore, we have simply
reported ﬁrst-order effects for probabilistic measures of local
predictability, perhaps inviting the assumption that these effects are linear, holding in the same way from low to high
probabilities. Even if this does not appear a priori unlikely to
some, our own preliminary explorations of this question suggest that this simple model is not true. The more complex
functional relationships between probability measures and
reduction are yet to be determined.
If of course remains to be seen how general these effects
are for all words in a conversation. In the general case, the
relative frequency of each word, which we did not examine,
plays a major role in the predictability of the word, and
would be expected to inﬂuence word forms strongly. It may
well interact with other measures, so that the effects found
here might turn out not to be so strong for less frequent
words. As a practical matter, disﬂuencies are disproportionately associated with function words, so that while we may
1022

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

ﬁnd that longer words, less frequent words, and content
words are longer and have less reduced forms in the presence
of disﬂuencies, such occurrences may not be frequent
enough to be of much practical importance for speech processing applications. Another difference that might be expected is that if the predictability effects found here are
strongly associated with the connections of function words
with particular constructions, then they may be weaker and
less extensive for words that occur more freely.
In addition to these conclusions about lexical representation and production, we would like to end with a methodological insight. We hope to have shown that a corpus-based
methodology such as ours can be paired with traditional controlled laboratory experiments to help provide insight into
psychological processes like lexical production. Corpusbased methods have the advantage of ecological validity. The
difﬁculty with corpus-based methods, of course, is that every
possible confounding factor must be explicitly controlled in
the statistical models. This requires time-consuming coding
of data and extensive computational manipulations to make
the data usable. Creating a very large hand-coded corpus is
difﬁcult, and there will always be factors that are beyond our
ability to control for. But, to the extent that such control is
possible, a corpus provides natural data whose frequencies
and properties may be much closer to the natural task of
language production than experimental materials can be. Obviously, it is important not to rely on any single method in
studying human language; corpus-based study of lexical production is merely one tool in the psycholinguistic and phonetic arsenal, but one whose time, we feel, has come.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project was partially supported by the NSF, via
awards IIS-9733067 and IIS-9978025. Many thanks to Joan
Bybee, Steve Greenberg, Janet Pierrehumbert, Mari Ostendorf, Bill Raymond, Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel, Elizabeth
Shriberg, and Caroline Smith, for many useful discussions on
the issues raised in this article, and especially to Stefanie
Shattuck-Hufnagel and an anonymous reviewer for extensive
comments on an earlier draft. We are also very grateful to
Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel and Mari Ostendorf for generously taking the time and effort to release to us a preliminary
version of their prosodically coded portion of Switchboard.
1

The choice of citation vowel is clear, even across American dialects, for all
the words except of, which likely varies idiolectally between ͓#͔ and ͓Ä͔.
The vowel ͓#͔ is arbitrarily taken to be the basic vowel of of here.
2
It is noteworthy that this does not accord with Bolinger’s lengthening rule,
which predicts that full vowels are longer before full vowels, whether separated by consonants or not. Testing the effect of following full vowels for
just items with full vowels also shows no overall effect on duration.
3
Since the regional dialect area of Switchboard speakers was coded in our
database, we checked the effect of this variable on our reduction indicators.
No effect of dialect was found for duration, vowel reduction, or coda deletion. Only the frequency of basic vowels appeared to differ across dialects. We did not pursue effects of other factors, individual comparisons of
dialects, or item effects.
4
It is perhaps surprising that much the same difference between men’s and
women’s speech rate is found for both read speech ͑i.e., Byrd’s TIMIT
result that men spoke 6.2% faster͒ and conversation ͑men’s rate of 5.4
syllables/s is 8.0 versus women here͒. This may be in part due to the local
measure ͑i.e., between pauses͒ used here. It is more like an articulation rate
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

measure than longer-term speaking rate measures, which would be strongly
inﬂuenced by pause rate.
5
We followed Fox Tree and Clark ͑1997͒ in choosing this deﬁnition of
disﬂuency mainly for simplicity; deciding if a word was preceded or followed by a disﬂuency could be coded automatically by software, and required no subjective coding. There are problems with this simpliﬁed deﬁnition. Obviously not all instances of these disﬂuencies reﬂect planning
problems. Some pauses and repetitions are ﬂuently planned, and ﬁlled or
silent pauses may initiate repair of previous speech, to mention just two
alternatives. In addition, this deﬁnition means that we did not code for other
disﬂuencies such as cutoffs and restarts, or for editing phrases such as I
mean. Incomplete and imprecise as our disﬂuency set is, it is nevertheless
an index of aspects of conversational structure that are strongly linked to
reduction variation in word forms.
6
The control variables used in the regressions were actually a subset of
these, since not all were signiﬁcant factors for each one of the response
variables. The regressions exclude items at the beginning or end of fragments and thus cover samples approximately 10 percent smaller than those
in Table IV. We chose not to control for utterance position in the regressions used to estimate the effects of disﬂuencies in this section because of
the smaller sample it would entail. We did, however, verify that for the
smaller sample coded for utterance position, the effect of disﬂuencies is
much the same with or without utterance position control. See a further
discussion of utterance position in Sec. VI.
7
Tests for the difference are based on the comparison of a regression model
that includes both variables with one with a single variable summing the
two, forcing equal weighting of the two variables.
8
Similar results were found for the 385 unaccented words ͑Sec. III C͒. Function words which were in the context of disﬂuencies were longer than those
which were not. There was a highly signiﬁcant effect both for preceding
disﬂuencies ͓ F(1,368)ϭ10.4, pϽ0.002͔ and for following disﬂuencies
͓ F(1,369)ϭ26.9, pϽ0.0001͔ . This indicates, at least, that the main result
cannot be an artifact of the distribution of intonational accents.
9
Figure 6 does not differentiate preceding disﬂuencies from following ones,
because for most of the words, one is about as frequent as the other. The
exceptions are of, which is 2.9 times more likely to occur before a disﬂuency than after one, and I and you, which are, respectively, 2.4 times and
4.4 times more likely to occur after a disﬂuency than before.
10
This summary, which for simplicity’s sake has collapsed preceding and
following disﬂuencies, conceals some strong differences among the words
in the relative strength of effects, depending on the direction. For example,
reduced vowels of a are strongly affected by both preceding and following
disﬂuencies, but those of and are much more affected by preceding disﬂuencies, and those of the much more affected by following ones.
11
As with disﬂuencies, similar results were found for the 385 unaccented
words ͑Sec. III C͒. Duration was affected by the ﬁve predictability variables, i.e., joint and conditional probabilities with the preceding word and
with the following word, and the interaction between the preceding joint
and conditional probabilities. The overall effect was highly signiﬁcant
͓ F(5,369)ϭ4.4, pϽ0.001͔ . Preceding and following word probabilities
were also individually signiﬁcant, and as with the overall sample, function
words that were more predictable from neighboring words were shorter.
12
Both vowel reduction and obstruent deletion can of course have gradient
sources in speech production, and the transcribers’ categorical choices for
the variables are unable to distinguish whether the source is from a lexical
choice or gradient articulatory variation. Particularly for some of the function words, some reduction and deletion is likely to be lexical, for example
͓tu͔ versus ͓t.͔, ͓,n͔ versus ͓.n͔, ͓.v͔ versus ͓.͔, and forms of and with
and without ﬁnal ͓d͔.
13
The utterance-segmented subset of Switchboard is comparable to the
larger ICSI sample in terms of proportions of individual function words,
average rate, average duration, and proportion of reduced vowels. It contains slightly more disﬂuencies, and many more men speakers, however.

Agresti, A. ͑1996͒. An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis ͑Wiley,
New York͒.
Bolinger, D. ͑1986͒. Intonation and its Parts: Melody in Spoken English
͑Stanford University Press, Stanford͒.
Browman, C. P., and Goldstein, L. ͑1992͒. ‘‘Articulatory phonology: An
overview,’’ Phonetica 49, 155–180.
Bush, N. ͑1999͒. ‘‘The predictive value of transitional probability for wordboundary palatalization in English,’’ Master’s thesis, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

Byrd, D., Kaun, A., Narayanan, S., and Saltzman, E. ͑2000͒. ‘‘Phrasal signatures in articulation,’’ in Papers in Laboratory Phonology V ͑Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge͒, pp. 70– 87.
Byrd, D. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Relations of sex and dialect to reduction,’’ Speech Commun. 23, 39–54.
Clark, H. H., and Wasow, T. ͑1998͒. ‘‘Repeating words in spontaneous
speech,’’ Cogn. Psychol. 37, 201–242.
Croft, W. ͑1995͒. ‘‘Intonation units and grammatical structure,’’ Linguistics
33, 839– 882.
Crystal, T. H., and House, A. S. ͑1990͒. ‘‘Articulation rate and the duration
of syllables and stress groups in connected speech,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
88, 101–112.
Dell, G. S. ͑1986͒. ‘‘A spreading activation theory of retrieval in sentence
production,’’ Psychol. Rev. 93, 283–321.
Fano, R. M. ͑1961͒. Transmission of Information; A Statistical Theory of
Communications ͑MIT Press, Cambridge, MA͒.
Fidelholz, J. ͑1975͒. ‘‘Word frequency and vowel reduction in English,’’ in
CLS-75 ͑University of Chicago, Chicago͒, pp. 200–213.
Fosler-Lussier, E. ͑1999a͒. ‘‘Contextual word and syllable pronunciation
models,’’ in Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE ASRU Workshop, Keystone,
Colorado.
Fosler-Lussier, E. ͑1999b͒. ‘‘Dynamic Pronunciation Models for Automatic
Speech Recognition,’’ Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley. Reprinted as ICSI Technical Report TR-99-015.
Fosler-Lussier, E., and Morgan, N. ͑1999͒. ‘‘Effects of speaking rate and
word frequency on conversational pronunciations,’’ Speech Commun. 29,
137–158.
Fougeron, C., and Keating, P. A. ͑1997͒. ‘‘Articulatory strengthening at
edges of prosodic domains,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 101, 3728 –3740.
Fowler, C. A., and Housum, J. ͑1987͒. ‘‘Talkers’ signaling of new and old
words in speech and listeners’ perception and use of the distinction,’’ J.
Memory Lang. 26, 489–504.
Fox Tree, J. E., and Clark, H. H. ͑1997͒. ‘‘Pronouncing ‘the’ as ‘thee’ to
signal problems in speaking,’’ Cognition 62, 151–167.
Godfrey, J., Holliman, E., and McDaniel, J. ͑1992͒. ‘‘SWITCHBOARD:
Telephone speech corpus for research and development,’’ in Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, & Signal Processing (IEEE ICASSP-92) ͑IEEE, San Francisco͒, pp. 517–520.
Greenberg, S. ͑1997͒. ‘‘Switchboard transcription system,’’ unpublished
manuscript labelers’ manual, revision of 19 February, 1997.
Greenberg, S., Ellis, D., and Hollenback, J. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Insights into spoken
language gleaned from phonetic transcription of the Switchboard corpus,’’
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing ͑ICSLP-96͒, Philadelphia, PA, pp. S24 –27.
Gregory, M. L., Raymond, W. D., Bell, A., Fosler-Lussier, E., and Jurafsky,
D. ͑1999͒. ‘‘The effects of collocational strength and contextual predictability in lexical production,’’ in CLS-99 ͑University of Chicago, Chicago͒, pp. 151–166.
Grifﬁn, Z. M., and Bock, K. ͑1998͒. ‘‘Constraint, word frequency, and the
relationship between lexical processing levels in spoken word production,’’ J. Memory Lang. 38, 313–338.
Hock, H. H. ͑1986͒. Principles of Historical Linguistics ͑Mouton, The
Hague͒.
Jescheniak, J. D., and Levelt, W. J. M. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Word frequency effects in
speech production: Retrieval of syntactic information and of phonological
form,’’ J. Exp. Psychol. Learn Mem. Cogn 20, 824 – 843.
Jespersen, O. ͑1922͒. Language ͑Holt, New York͒.
Jurafsky, D. ͑1996͒. ‘‘A probabilistic model of lexical and syntactic access
and disambiguation,’’ Cogn. Sci. 20, 137–194.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., and Girand, C. ͑2002͒. ‘‘The role of the lemma in
form variation,’’ in Papers in Laboratory Phonology 7, edited by
N. Warner and C. Gussenhoven ͑Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin/New York͒
pp. 3–34.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., and Raymond, W. D. ͑2001͒. ‘‘Probabilistic relations between words: Evidence from reduction in lexical production,’’ in Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic Structure, edited by
J. Bybee and P. Hopper ͑Benjamins, Amsterdam͒, pp. 229–254.
Jurafsky, D., and Martin, J. H. ͑2000͒. Speech and Language Processing
͑Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ͒.
Keating, P. A., Byrd, D., Flemming, E., and Todaka, Y. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Phonetic
analysis of word and segment variation using the TIMIT corpus of American English,’’ Speech Commun. 14, 131–142.
Klatt, D. H. ͑1975͒. ‘‘Vowel lengthening is syntactically determined in a
connected discourse,’’ J. Phonetics 3, 129–140.
Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

1023

Krug, M. ͑1998͒. ‘‘String frequency: A cognitive motivating factor in coalescence, language processing, and linguistic change,’’ J. Engl. Linguistics
26, 286 –320.
Ladd, D. R., and Campbell, N. ͑1991͒. ‘‘Theories of prosodic structure:
Evidence from syllable duration,’’ in Proceedings of the 12th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Aix-en-Provence, France, pp. 290–293.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., and Meyer, A. S. ͑1999͒. ‘‘A theory of lexical
access in speech production,’’ Behav. Brain Sci. 22„1…, 1–75.
Lieberman, P. ͑1963͒. ‘‘Some effects of the semantic and grammatical context on the production and perception of speech,’’ Lang Speech 6, 172–
175.
MacDonald, M. C. ͑1993͒. ‘‘The interaction of lexical and syntactic ambiguity,’’ J. Memory Lang. 32, 692–715.
¨
Manning, C. D., and Schutze, H. ͑1999͒. Foundations of Statistical Natural
Language Processing ͑MIT Press, Cambridge, MA͒.
Marcus, M. P., Santorini, B., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., and Taylor, A. ͑1999͒.
Treebank-3, Linguistic Data Consortium ͑LDC͒. Catalog #LDC99T42.
McRae, K., Spivey-Knowlton, M. J., and Tanenhaus, M. K. ͑1998͒. ‘‘Modeling the inﬂuence of thematic ﬁt ͑and other constraints͒ in on-line sentence comprehension,’’ J. Memory Lang. 38, 283–312.
Meteer, M. et al. ͑1995͒. Dysﬂuency Annotation Stylebook for the Switchboard Corpus, Linguistic Data Consortium. Revised June 1995 by Ann
Taylor. ftp://ftp.cis.upenn.edu/pub/treebank/swbd/doc/DFL – book.ps.gz
Neu, H. ͑1980͒. ‘‘Ranking of constraints on /t,d/ deletion in American English: A statistical analysis,’’ in Locating Language in Time and Space,
edited by W. Labov ͑Academic, New York͒, pp. 37–54.
O’Shaughnessy, D. ͑1992͒. ‘‘Automatic recognition of hesitations in spontaneous speech,’’ in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, & Signal Processing ͑IEEE ICASSP-92͒, Vol. I, pp.
593–596.
´
Plauche, M., and Shriberg, E. ͑1999͒. ‘‘Data-driven subclassiﬁcation of disﬂuent repetitions based on prosodic features,’’ in Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences ͑ICPhS-99͒, San Francisco, Vol. 2,
pp. 1513–1516.
Rhodes, R. A. ͑1992͒. ‘‘Flapping in American English,’’ in Proceedings of
the 7th International Phonology Meeting, edited by W. U. Dressler, M.
Prinzhorn, and J. Rennison ͑Rosenberg and Sellier, Turin͒, pp. 217–232.
Rhodes, R. A. ͑1996͒. ‘‘English reduced vowels and the nature of natural
processes,’’ in Natural Phonology: The State of the Art, edited by B.
Hurch and R. A. Rhodes ͑Mouton de Gruyter, The Hague͒, pp. 239–259.
Saffran, J. R., Newport, E. L., and Aslin, R. N. ͑1996a͒. ‘‘Statistical learning
by 8-month-old infants,’’ Science 274, 1926 –1928.

1024

J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 113, No. 2, February 2003

Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., and Newport, E. L. ͑1996b͒. ‘‘Statistical cues in
language acquisition: Word segmentation by infants,’’ in COGSCI-96, pp.
376 –380.
Schiffrin, D. ͑1987͒. Discourse Markers ͑Cambridge University Press, Cambridge͒.
¨
Schuchardt, H. ͑1985͒. Uber die Lautgesetze: Gegen die Junggrammatiker.
Robert Oppenheim, Berlin. Excerpted with English translation in Schuchardt, the Neogrammarians, and the Transformational Theory of Phonological Change, edited by T. Vennemann and T. H. Wilbur ͑Athenaum, Frankfurt, 1972͒ pp. 39–72.
Seidenberg, M. S., and MacDonald, M. C. ͑1999͒. ‘‘A probabilistic constraints approach to language acquisition and processing,’’ Cogn. Sci. 23,
569–588.
Shattuck-Hufnagel, S., and Ostendorf, M. ͑1999͒. POSH labeling guide—
version 1.0. Unpublished draft.
Shriberg, E. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Preliminaries to a Theory of Speech Disﬂuencies,’’
Ph.D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley, CA. ͑unpublished͒.
Shriberg, E. ͑1995͒. ‘‘Acoustic properties of disﬂuent repetitions,’’ in Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences ͑ICPhS-95͒,
Stockholm, Sweden, Vol. 4, pp. 384 –387.
Shriberg, E. ͑1999͒. ‘‘Phonetic consequences of speech disﬂuency,’’ in Proceedings of the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences ͑ICPhS-99͒,
San Francisco, Vol. I, pp. 619– 622.
Silverman, K., Beckman, M. E., Pitrelli, J., Ostendorf, M., Wightman, C.,
Price, P., Pierrehumbert, J., and Hirschberg, J. ͑1992͒. ‘‘TOBI: a standard
for labelling English prosody,’’ in Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing ͑ICSLP-92͒, Vol. 2, pp. 867– 870.
Stemberger, J. ͑1985͒. ‘‘An interactive activation model of language production,’’ in Progress in the Psychology of Language, edited by A. Ellis ͑Erlbaum, London͒, pp. 143–186.
Trueswell, J. C., and Tanenhaus, M. K. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Toward a lexicalist framework for constraint-based syntactic ambiguity resolution,’’ in Perspectives
on Sentence Processing, edited by C. Clifton, Jr., L. Frazier, and K.
Rayner ͑Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ͒, pp. 155–179.
Wald, B., and Shopen, T. ͑1981͒. ‘‘A researcher’s guide to the sociolinguistic
variable ͑ING͒,’’ in Style and Variables in English, edited by T. Shopen
and J. M. Williams ͑Winthrop, Cambridge, MA͒, pp. 219–249.
Zipf, G. K. ͑1929͒. ‘‘Relative frequency as a determinant of phonetic
change,’’ Harv. Studies Classi Philol. 15, 1–95.

Bell et al.: Disﬂuencies, predictability, position, and form variation

