A Computational Analysis of Style, Affect, and Imagery in Contemporary
Poetry
Dan Jurafsky
Linguistics Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
jurafsky@stanford.edu

Justine Kao
Psychology Department
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
justinek@stanford.edu

Abstract
What makes a poem beautiful? We use
computational methods to compare the stylistic and content features employed by awardwinning poets and amateur poets. Building
upon existing techniques designed to quantitatively analyze style and affect in texts, we
examined elements of poetic craft such as diction, sound devices, emotive language, and
imagery. Results showed that the most important indicator of high-quality poetry we could
detect was the frequency of references to concrete objects. This result highlights the inﬂuence of Imagism in contemporary professional
poetry, and suggests that concreteness may be
one of the most appealing features of poetry to
the modern aesthetic. We also report on other
features that characterize high-quality poetry
and argue that methods from computational
linguistics may provide important insights into
the analysis of beauty in verbal art.

1

Introduction

Poetry is nerved with ideas, blooded with emotions,
held together by the delicate, tough skin of words.
—Paul Engle (1908 -1991)
Many people have experienced the astounding
and transformational power of a beautiful poem.
However, little empirical research has been done to
examine the textual features or mental processes that
engender such a sensation. In this paper, we propose a computational framework for analyzing textual features that may be responsible for generating

sensations of poetic beauty. We built a poetry corpus consisting of poems by award-winning professional poets and amateur poets, and compared poems in the two categories using various quantitative features. Although there are many reasons why
some poems are included in prestigious anthologies
and others are never read, such as a poet’s fame, we
assume that the main reason is that some poems are
perceived as more aesthetically pleasing than others
and are thus selected by editors. Given this assumption, we believe that the kind of comparison we propose should be the ﬁrst step towards understanding
how certain textual features might evoke aesthetic
sensations more than others.
The next sections review previous computational
work on poetry and motivate the features we use; we
then introduce our corpus, our analyses, and results.

2

Computational aesthetics

Previous research on the computational analysis of
poetry focused on quantifying poetic devices such
as rhyme and meter (Hayward, 1996; Greene et al.,
2010; Genzel et al., 2010), tracking stylistic inﬂuence between authors (Forstall et al., 2011), or classifying poems based on the poet and style (Kaplan
& Blei, 2007; He et al., 2007; Fang et al., 2009).
These studies showed that computational methods
can reveal interesting statistical properties in poetic
language that allow us to better understand and categorize great works of literature (Fabb, 2006). However, there has been very little work using computational techniques to answer an important question in
both poetics and linguistics (Jakobson, 1960): what
makes one poem more aesthetically appealing than

another ?
One such attempt is the “aesthetic measure” proposed by mathematician G.D. Birkhoff, who formalized beauty as a ratio between order and complexity (Birkhoff, 1933). Birkhoff found interesting correlations between the measure and people’s
aesthetic judgments of shapes, sounds, and poems.
While the aesthetic measure enjoyed some success
in the domain of visual arts (Rigau et al., 2008),
it ran into problems of semantics when applied to
language. Birkhoff’s aesthetic measure judges a
poem’s beauty based solely on phonemic features,
such as alliterations and assonance, rhymes, and musical vowels. The formula does not capture the subtlety of word choice or richness of meaning in poetry. Since Birkhoff’s measure only considers phonetic features, it fails to fully quantify the aesthetic
value of meaningful poetic texts.
In this paper, we aim to combine computational
linguistics with computational aesthetics. We introduce a variety of theoretically-motivated features
that target both poetic style and content, and examine whether each feature is a distinguishing characteristic of poetry that is considered to be beautiful by
modern experts and critics.

3

Elements of Craft

One demands two things of a poem. Firstly, it must
be a well-made verbal object that does honor to the
language in which it is written. Secondly, it must say
something signiﬁcant about a reality common to us
all, but perceived from a unique perspective
—W. H. Auden (1907 - 1973)
We review several elements of craft that creative
writers and critics reference in their analysis and appreciation of poetry. For each feature that we consider in our model, we provide theoretical motivation from creative writing and literary criticism. We
then describe how we computed the values of each
feature using tools from computational linguistics.
3.1

Diction

Aristotle argued that good writing consists of a balance of ordinary words that make the writing comprehensible and strange words that make the writing distinguished (Aristotle, 1998). Several hundred years later, Longinus argued that “noble dic-

tion and elevated word arrangement” is one of the
primary sources of aesthetic language (Earnshaw,
2007; Longinus, 2001). These early scholars of poetic craft passed down the belief that poetic beauty
stems from the level of individual words. In her
inﬂuential creative writing textbook titled, “Imaginative Writing: The Elements of Craft,” Burroway
(2007) describes poetry as a high-density form of
language. Poetic language is usually intentionally
ambiguous and often packs several meanings into
a compact passage (Addonizio & Laux, 1997). As
a result, each word in a poem carries especially
heavy weight and must be carefully selected and digested. Based on these ideas, we decided to examine
whether or not good poetry is deﬁned by the use of
sophisticated vocabulary.
Diction can be evaluated from two different perspectives: word frequency, a measure of difﬁculty,
and type-token ratio, a measure of diversity.
Word frequency: Psychologists, linguists, and
testing agencies often use word frequency to estimate the difﬁculty and readability of words and sentences (Marks, Carolyn B. et al., 1974; Breland,
1996). Based on these studies, it is reasonable to
predict that poems written by professional poets may
contain more difﬁcult words and lower average word
frequencies than poems written by amateur poets.
We measured average word frequency using a list
of top 500,000 most frequent words from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA)
(Davies, 2011). An average log word frequency was
obtained for each poem by looking up each word in
the poem in the word list and summing up the log
word frequencies. The total log frequency was then
divided by the number of words in the poem to obtain the average.
Type-token ratio: Readability measures and automatic essay grading systems often use the ratio of total word types to total number of words
in order to evaluate vocabulary sophistication, with
higher type-token ratios indicating more diverse and
sophisticated vocabulary (Ben-Simon & Bennett,
2007; Pitler & Nenkova, 2008). We predict that
professional poets utilize a larger and more varied
vocabulary and avoid using the same word several
times throughout a poem. A type-token ratio score
was calculated for each poem by counting all the
separate instances of words and dividing that num-

ber by the total number of words in the poem.
3.2

Sound Device

Poetry has a rich oral tradition that predates literacy, and traces of this aspect of poetic history can
be found in sound devices such as rhyme, repetition, and meter. How a poem sounds is critical to
how it is perceived, understood, and remembered.
Indeed, most contemporary creative writing handbooks devote sections to deﬁning various sound devices and analyzing notable poetry according to interesting patterns of sound (Burroway, 2007; Addonizio & Laux, 1997).
The sound device features described below were
computed using Kaplan’s 2006 PoetryAnalyzer. PoetryAnalyzer utilizes the Carnegie Mellon Pronouncing Dictionary to obtain pronunciations of
words in each poem and identify patterns indicative
of poetic sound devices.
Perfect and slant end rhyme: Rhyme is one of
the most well-known and popular sound devices in
poetry. The earliest poets used strict rhyme schemes
as a mnemonic device to help them memorize and
recite long poems. Research in psychology has conﬁrmed poets’ intuitions about the powerful effects
of rhyme on perception and learning. For example,
an aphorism that contains a rhyme is more likely to
be perceived as true than a non-rhyming aphorism
with the same meaning (McGlone & Toﬁghbakhsh,
2000). Exposure to rhymes also enhances phonological awareness in young children and can lead to
better reading performances (Bryant et al., 1990).
The PoetryAnalyzer identiﬁes end rhymes in poems by examining the phoneme sequences at the end
of lines. A window of four line endings is analyzed
at a time. If two words in the window have different
initial consonants but identical phoneme sequences
from the stressed vowel phoneme onward, then an
instance of a perfect end rhyme instance is recorded.
The ﬁnal count of perfect end rhymes in a poem is
normalized by the total number of words. If two
words in the window of four line endings have the
same stressed vowel but different phonemes following the stressed vowel, then an instance of a slant
end rhyme is recorded. The ﬁnal count of slant end
rhymes in a poem is normalized by the total number
of words.
Alliteration and consonance: Alliteration is the

repetition of consonant sounds at the beginning of
words, and consonance is the repetition of consonant sounds elsewhere. In addition to rhyme, alliteration was used as a powerful mnemonic device in
ancient epic poetry (Rubin, 1995). Researchers in
psychology and discourse analysis have shown that
alliteration reactivates readers’ memories for previous information that was phonologically similar to
the cue (Lea et al., 2008).
The PoetryAnalyzer identiﬁes alliteration and
consonance as follows. If the initial phoneme of two
consecutive words are identical consonants, the alliteration count is incremented. The total count is then
divided by the total number of words to obtain a alliteration score for each poem. If there are at least
two identical consonant phonemes in a window of
nine syllables, the consonance count is incremented.
The count is divided by the total number of words in
a poem to obtain a consonance score.
Assonance: Assonance is the repetition of vowel
sounds. Similar to consonants, different vowel
sounds also have their own characteristics and effects. Long vowels take longer to utter and draw out
the rhythm and pacing of the line, while short vowels feel brief and urgent (Burroway, 2007).
We calculated an assonance score for each poem
in the same fashion as we did for the consonance
score, except the target phonemes are vowels instead
of consonants.
3.3

Affect

Studies have shown that poetry allows mental health
patients to explore and reinterpret their emotions
in useful ways. Through reading and writing poetry, patients are able to freely express their thoughts
without the constraints of form and logic (Harrower,
1972). On the other hand, critics of poetry therapy
have suggested that writing poetry may be harmful
to psychological health, because it allows the poet
to immerse herself in an inexplicable emotion without having to make sense or order out of it (Stirman
& Pennebaker, 2001). For example, Silverman &
Will (1986) claimed that Sylvia Plath’s poetry may
have undermined her control mechanisms and contributed to her death. If reading good poetry is found
to be cathartic and therapeutic, do skilled poets make
more references to psychological states and explore
the emotional world with more depth and intensity?

We examine this question using several existing
sentiment lexicons available for sentiment analysis research. One is the Harvard General Inquirer,
which consists of 182 word categories, including
basic sentiment categories, categories for concrete
objects, and categories for abstract concepts (Stone
et al., 1966). Another sentiment lexicon is the
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) (Pennebaker et al., 2001). While the General Inquirer
was designed for content analysis, LIWC was designed to facilitate the understanding of individuals’
cognitive and emotional states through text analysis. As a result, most of the categories in LIWC involve mental activity, with over 4, 500 words related
to affective, social, and cognitive processes. Six categories from the Harvard General Inquirer and two
categories from LIWC were selected because they
are most suitable for our purpose of analyzing elements of poetic craft. These features are summarized in Table 1.
3.4

Imagery

One of the most important and oft-repeated piece of
advice for writers is the following: “Show, don’t
tell.” Burroway (2007) interprets this as meaning:
“Use concrete, signiﬁcant details that address the
senses.” Effective imagery allows readers to bring
in their own associations to understand and truly experience a new emotion, and skilled poets and writers are able to pick out speciﬁc sensory details that
evoke deeper abstractions and generalizations.
The appeal of concrete imagery may have roots in
processes that facilitate learning and memory. Previous research has shown that concrete noun pairs are
easier to memorize than abstract noun pairs, which
suggests that imagery can enhance the learning of
word pairings (Paivio et al., 1966). Other studies
have shown that mental imagery facilitates relational
association between concepts (Bower, 1970). Furthermore, Jessen et al. (2000) found neural correlates that suggest that concrete nouns are processed
differently in the brain than abstract nouns. One of
the reasons why we ﬁnd poetic imagery striking may
be due to the psychological power of imagery to
evoke rich associations formed by culture and personal experience.
Another reason why imagery is an essential element of poetic craft is that it allows writers to avoid

Feature
Word frequency
Type-token ratio
Perfect end rhyme
Slant end rhyme
Alliteration
Consonance
Assonance
Positive outlook
Negative outlook
Positive emotion
Negative emotion
Phys. wellbeing
Psych. wellbeing
Object
Abstract
Generalization

Examples
–
–
ﬂoor / store
bred / end
frozen ﬁeld
brown skin hung
shallower and yellowed
able; friend
abandon; enemy
happiness; love
fury; sorrow
alive; eat
calm; adjust
boat; leaf
day; love
none; all

Table 1: Summary of features

falling into cliche, which is the bane of the creative
writer’s existence. Burroway (2007) writes, “ﬂat
writing is. . . full of abstractions, generalizations, and
judgments. When these are replaced with nouns that
call up a sense image and with verbs that represent
actions we can visualize, the writing comes alive.”
Many abstract and common concepts can be embodied or evoked by surprising imagery. In our analysis, we predict that skilled poets are more likely to
describe concrete objects and less likely to reference
abstract concepts. We measure the degree to which
a poem contains concrete details rather than abstractions and generalizations using categories from the
Harvard General Inquirer (see Table 1).

4
4.1

Methods
Materials

In order to test the deﬁning features of beautiful poetry described in the section above, we constructed
a corpus containing poems that vary in quality and
“beauty” by some established standard. One way
to do this would be to randomly sample poems from
various sources and ask experts to rate them for quality and beauty. However, such a method can be expensive and time-consuming. A more efﬁcient way
of achieving a similar effect is to sample poems from
pre-existing categories, such as poems written by

skilled professional poets versus poems written by
amateur poets. We assume that award-winning poets
produce poems that experts would consider “better”
and more beautiful than poetry written by amateurs.
Although there might be exceptions, since for example experts may consider some poems written by
amateur poets to be very beautiful and sophisticated,
these pre-existing categories for the most part should
be a good approximation of expert opinions.
One hundred poems were selected from sixtyseven professional poets whose work was published
in a collection of Contemporary American Poetry
(Poulin & Waters, 2006). The poets produced most
of their work towards the middle and end of the 20th
century and are considered some of the best contemporary poets in America (e.g., Louise Gluck, Mary
Oliver, Mark Strand, etc.). All of the poets are listed
in the website of the Academy of American Poets
and many have won prestigious awards. This serves
as conﬁrmation that the poets in this collection are
widely acclaimed and that their craft is acknowledged and celebrated by poetry experts and literary
critics.
We randomly selected one to three poems from
each poet, proportionate to the number of poems
each poet had in the collection. When an excessively
long poem (over 500 words) was selected, we removed it and replaced it with a different poem from
the same poet. This served as a rough control for the
length of the poems in the corpus. The ﬁnal selection
of one hundred professional poems ranged from 33
to 371 words in length with an average length of 175
words. We believe that these poems are a good representation of work produced by the best and most
celebrated poets of our time.
In addition, one hundred poems were selected
from amateur poets who submitted their work
anonymously to a free and open-to-all website,
aptly called “Amateur Writing” (www.amateurwriting.com). At the time of selection, the website
had over 2500 amateur poem submissions by registered users. The website contains a diverse set of
poems submitted by amateur writers with a wide
range of experience and skill levels. We randomly
selected one hundred poems from the website and
corrected for misspellings and obvious grammatical
errors in the poems to control for the effect of basic
language skills. The ﬁnal selection of amateur po-

ems ranged from 21 to 348 words in length with an
average length of 136 words.
4.2

Procedures

We implemented the 16 features described in section 3, each of which target one of three separate
domains: style, sentiment, and imagery. The sound
device scores were computed using PoetryAnalyzer
(Kaplan & Blei, 2007). For each category taken
from the General Inquirer, scores were calculated
using the General Inquirer system available on a
server (Inquirer, 2011). A score for a certain category is the number of words in a poem that appear in the category normalized by the length of the
poem. For the two categories taken from LIWC,
scores were calculated by counting the number of
words in each poem that match a word stem in the
LIWC dictionary and dividing it by the total number
of words. A score for each of the features was derived for every poem in the poetry corpus. All scores
were then standardized to have zero mean and unit
variance across poems.

5

Results and Analysis

To measure the effect of each variable on the likelihood of a poem being written by a professional
or an amateur poet, we constructed a logistic regression model in R (R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing). For model selection, we used the step-wise backward elimination
method. This method begins by building a model using all 16 feature variables. It then recursively eliminates variables that do not signiﬁcantly contribute
to explaining the variance in the data according to
the Akaike information criterion (AIC), which measures the amount of information lost when using a
certain model. The selection method stops when further eliminating a variable would result in signiﬁcant
loss of information and model ﬁt. The ﬁnal logistic
regression model for the predictors of professional
versus amateur poetry is summarized in the formula
above (Table 2). Note that the variables included in
the ﬁnal model might not all be statistically signiﬁcant.
Results show that poem type (professional or amateur) is signiﬁcantly predicted by eight different
variables (p < 0.05): type token ratio, perfect

Probability(poem type = professional |X), where
Xβ −0.6071 =
−0.5039 * average log word frequency +
0.6646 * type token ratio
+
0.4602 * slant end rhyme frequency
+
−2.1 * perfect end rhyme frequency +
−0.6326 * alliteration frequency
+
−1.0701 * positive outlook words
+
−0.7861 * negative emotional words
+
−0.5227 * psychological words
+
1.3124 * concrete object words
+
−1.2633 * abstract concept words
+
−0.836 * generalization words

Feature variable
type token ratio
perfect end rhyme frequency
alliteration frequency
positive outlook words
negative emotional words
concrete object words
abstract concept words
generalization words

p-value
0.0308
5.06e−7
0.0188
0.0130
0.0244
0.0002
0.0027
0.0035

Table 3: Odds ratios and p values of signiﬁcant predictors
of professional poetry

Professional
Word
Count
tree
29
room
20
thing
18
grass
17
wall
14
ﬂower
13
glass
13
ﬂoor
13
car
12
dirt
11
[. . .]
538
Proportion
4.1%
Type count
250

Table 2: Model formula

end rhyme frequency, alliteration frequency, positive
outlook words, negative emotional words, concrete
object words, abstract concept words, and generalization words. The other nine variables: average log
word frequency, slant end rhyme frequency, assonance, consonance, negative outlook words, positive
emotional words, physical well-being words, and
psychological words did not have signiﬁcant predictive value. While positive outlook and positive emotion were highly correlated (r = 0.54), as were negative outlook and negative emotion (r = 0.53), there
was no collinearity among the variables in the ﬁnal
logistic regression model selected by the backward
elimination method.
The model predicts the likelihood of the poem
type (professional or amateur) using the formula described in Table 2. The inﬂuence of each feature is
represented by the coefﬁcient β for each variable.
A positive value for a coefﬁcient increases the likelihood of a poem being written by a professional.
For example, type token ratio and concrete object
words have positive coefﬁcient values; thus higher
type token ratios and more concrete object words increase the likelihood of a poem being a professional
poem. A negative value for a coefﬁcient decreases
the likelihood of a poem being written by a professional. For example, perfect end rhyme frequency
has a negative coefﬁcient value, and thus higher perfect end rhyme frequencies decrease the likelihood
of a poem being written by a professional poet. The
relative odds and p-values of each signiﬁcant predictor variable are presented in Table 3.

Odds
1.94
0.12
0.53
0.34
0.46
3.72
0.28
0.43

Amateur
Word
Count
thing
40
wall
12
bed
11
clock
7
room
7
tree
6
leave
6
gift
5
mirror
4
ﬂower
4
[. . .]
103
Proportion
1.5%
Type count
85

Table 4: Concrete words

In summary, professional poems have signiﬁcantly higher type-token ratios, contain fewer perfect end rhymes, fewer instances of alliteration,
fewer positive outlook words, fewer negative emotional words, more references to concrete objects,
less references to abstract concepts, and fewer generalizations. From the odds ratios, we can see that
the most signiﬁcant predictors of professional poetry
are fewer perfect end rhymes and more references to
concrete objects.

6

Discussion

What are skilled poets doing differently from amateurs when they write beautiful poetry? Based on results from our regression model, it appears that Aristotle may have been wrong about diction, at least
for modern poetry. The words in professional po-

Professional
Word
Count
day
40
night
31
year
25
time
20
death
11
new
9
morning
8
childhood
7
hour
7
afternoon
7
[. . .]
139
Proportion
1.8%
Type count
82

Amateur
Word
Count
day
54
time
33
beauty
25
soul
16
night
15
new
14
moment
13
christmas
12
think
11
future
9
[. . .]
143
Proportion
2.6%
Type count
75

Table 5: Abstract words

Professional
Word
Count
all
63
nothing
26
never
19
always
14
every
11
any
10
anything
5
nobody
5
everything
5
forever
3
Proportion < 1%

Amateur
Word
Count
all
82
never
46
always
43
nothing
21
every
15
forever
14
anything
7
any
6
everything
5
everyone
4
Proportion
1.8%

Table 6: Generalization words

etry are not signiﬁcantly more unusual or difﬁcult
than words used by amateur writers. This suggests
that contemporary poets are not interested in ﬂowery
diction or obscure words, but are focused on using
ordinary words to create extraordinary effects.
However, professional poets do use more distinct
word types. The 100 poems written by professional
poets contain a total of 18, 304 words and 4, 315 distinct word types (23.57%). The 100 poems written
by amateur poets contain a total of 14, 046 words
and 2, 367 distinct word types (16.85%), a much
smaller portion. In aggregate, professional poets
have a larger and more varied vocabulary than amateur poets. Moreover, professional poets use a signiﬁcantly larger number of word types within each
poem. Although professional poets do not use more
difﬁcult and unusual words, higher type-token ratio is a signiﬁcant predictor of professional poetry,
suggesting that professional poems may be distinguished by a richer set of words.
The results on sound devices provide interesting
insight into the current stylistic trends of contemporary professional poetry. While sound devices have a
long history in poetry and are considered a feature of
poetic beauty, contemporary professional poets now
use these devices much less often than amateur poets. Sound devices that were traditionally important
in poetry for mnemonic purposes, such as rhyme
and alliteration, are more prevalent in amateur poems. Even subtle and sophisticated sound devices
like slant rhyme, consonance, and assonance are not
signiﬁcant indicators of professional poetry. These
results suggest that repetition of sound is becoming
a less aesthetically signiﬁcant poetic device among
contemporary masters of poetry.
In terms of affect, our results suggest that poems by professional poets are not more negatively
emotional—at least not explicitly. On the contrary,
amateur poets are signiﬁcantly more likely to reference negative emotions than professional poets.
Our results reveal an interesting distinction between
words with positive and negative outlooks and connotations versus words that reference positive and
negative emotions. While the two pairs of categories are strongly correlated, they capture different
aspects of a text’s emotional content. The positive
and negative outlook categories contain many words
that are not emotions but may evoke certain emo-

tional attitudes, such as clean and death. The fact
that professional poets are signiﬁcantly less likely to
use explicitly negative emotion words than amateur
poets, but not signiﬁcantly less likely to use negatively connotative words, suggests that professional
poets may evoke more negative sentiment through
connotation rather than explicit descriptions.
As predicted, poems written by professional poets
contain signiﬁcantly more words that reference objects and signiﬁcantly less words about abstract concepts and generalizations. This result suggests that
professional poets follow the sacred rule of “show,
don’t tell” and let images instead of words convey emotions, concepts, and experiences that stick
to readers’ minds. Professional poets not only use
more object words than amateur poets (698 counts
versus 205), but they also use a larger and more diverse set of object words (250 types versus 85), as
shown in Table 4. Professional poets reference natural objects very often, such as tree, grass, and ﬂower.
On the other hand, the most frequent concrete object
word in amateur poems is the extremely vague word
thing. This suggests that even when amateur poets
reference concrete objects, they do not use words
that provide speciﬁc sensory details.
Our analysis supports the idea that Imagism has
strongly inﬂuenced the ways in which modern poets
and literary critics think about literary writing. Literary critic I.A. Richards argued that image clusters
and patterns of imagery are keys to deeper meaning
in literary works, and that critics should pay close attention to these patterns in order to understand “the
language of art” beneath the surface ordinary language (Richards, 1893). Not only are concrete images able to render the world in spectacular detail,
they also provide windows into particular experiences on which readers can project their own perceptions and interpretations.
Consistent with our predictions and with the aesthetic ideals of Imagism, professional poets also
make signiﬁcantly fewer direct references to abstract
and intangible concepts (Table 5). If the deeper
meaning of a poem is conveyed through imagery, abstract words are no longer needed to reference concepts and experiences explicitly. Moreover, amateur
poets use signiﬁcantly more words concerned with
generalizations, as shown in Table 6. While amateur
poets embrace the human impulse to generalize, the

skilled poet must learn to extract and report unique
details that single out each experience from the rest.
Overall, our results suggest that professional poets are more likely to show, while amateur poets
have a tendency to tell. This difference marks the
most signiﬁcant distinction between contemporary
professional and amateur poetry in our analysis and
may be an essential aspect of craft and poetic beauty.

7

Future directions

Categorizing poetry as professional or amateur is a
rather course measure of quality. In order to identify deﬁning features of more ﬁne-grained levels
of poetic skill, future work could compare awardwinning poetry with poems written by less prestigious but also professionally trained poets. Experimenting with different databases and lexicons for
affect and imagery could also be helpful, such as
word-emotion associations (Mohammad & Turney,
2011) and imageability ratings (Coltheart, 1981).
More sophisticated methods of dealing with sense
ambiguities and meaning compositionality in the
words in affective lexicons (Socher et al., 2011)
should be applied to help enhance and improve upon
our current analyses.
While our approach reveals interesting patterns
that shed light on elements of poetic sophistication,
conclusions from the analysis need to be tested using controlled experiments. For example, does modifying a professional poem to include less concrete
words make people perceive it as less beautiful?
In summary, our framework provides a novel way
to discover potential features of poetic beauty that
can then be experimentally tested and conﬁrmed. By
applying both stylistic and content analyses to the
quantitative assessment of contemporary poetry, we
were able to examine poetic craft on a representative
set of poems and reveal potential elements of skill
and sophistication in modern poetry.

Acknowledgments
We are deeply grateful for David Kaplan’s generosity in sharing the code for the PoetryAnalyzer program, on which a substantial part of our analysis is
based. We would also like to thank Lera Boroditsky,
Todd Davies, and the anonymous reviewers for their
extremely helpful feedback.

References
Addonizio, K., & Laux, D. (1997). The Poet’s Companion: A guide to the pleasures of writing poetry. W. W. Norton and Company.
Aristotle (1998). Poetics. The Critical Tradition:
Classical Texts and Contemporary Trends.
Ben-Simon, A., & Bennett, R. E. (2007). Toward
more substantively meaningful automated essay
scoring. The journal of Technology, Learning, and
Assessment.
Birkhoff, G. (1933). Aesthetic Measure. Kessinger
Publishing.
Bower, G. (1970). Imagery as a relational organizer
in associative learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9(5), 529–533.
Breland, H. M. (1996). Word frequency and word
difﬁculty: A comparison of counts in four corpora. Psychological Science, 7(2), pp. 96–99.
Bryant, P., Maclean, M., Bradley, L., & Crossland,
J. (1990). Rhyme and alliteration, phoneme detection, and learning to read. Developmental Psychology, 26(3).
Burroway, J. (2007). Imaginative Writing: The Elements of Craft. Pearson, 2 ed.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The mrc psycholinguistic
database. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33(4), 497–505.
Davies, M. (2011).
Word frequency data
from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA).
Downloaded from
http://www.wordfrequency.info on May 10, 2011.
Earnshaw, S. (Ed.) (2007). The Handbook of Creative Writing. Edinburgh University Press.
Fabb, N. (2006). Generated metrical form and implied metrical form. Formal approaches to poetry,
(pp. 77–91).
Fang, A. C., Lo, F., & Chinn, C. K. (2009). Adapting nlp and corpus analysis techniques to structured imagery analysis in classical chinese poetry.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Adaptation of
Language Resources and Technology to New Domains, AdaptLRTtoND ’09, (pp. 27–34).
Forstall, C., Jacobson, S., & Scheirer, W. (2011).
Evidence of intertextuality: investigating paul the

deacon’s angustae vitae. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 26(3), 285–296.
Genzel, D., Uszkoreit, J., & Och, F. (2010). Poetic statistical machine translation: rhyme and
meter. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, (pp. 158–166). Association for Computational Linguistics.
Greene, E., Bodrumlu, T., & Knight, K. (2010). Automatic analysis of rhythmic poetry with applications to generation and translation. In Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP
’10, (pp. 524–533).
Harrower, M. (1972). The therapy of poetry. Oryx,
London.
Hayward, M. (1996). Analysis of a corpus of poetry
by a connectionist model of poetic meter. Poetics,
24(1), 1–11.
He, Z., Liang, W., Li, L., & Tian, Y. (2007). Svmbased classiﬁcation method for poetry style. In
Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 2007 International Conference on, vol. 5, (pp. 2936–2940).
IEEE.
Inquirer, H. G. (2011). How the general inquirer is
used and a comparison of general inquirer with
other text-analysis procedures.
Jakobson, R. (1960). Closing statement: Linguistics
and poetics. Style in language, 350, 377.
Jessen, F., Heun, R., Erb, M., Granath, D. O., Klose,
U., Papassotiropoulos, A., & Grodd, W. (2000).
The concreteness effect: Evidence for dual coding and context availability. Brain and Language,
74(1), 103 – 112.
Kaplan, D. (2006). Computational analysis and visualized comparison of style in american poetry.
Unpublished undergraduate thesis.
Kaplan, D., & Blei, D. (2007). A computational approach to style in american poetry. In IEEE Conference on Data Mining.
Lea, R., Rapp, D., Elfenbein, A., Mitchel, A., &
Romine, R. (2008). Sweet silent thought: Alliteration and resonance in poetry comprehension.
Psychological Science, 19(709).

Longinus (2001). On sublimity. The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism.

ing, (pp. 151–161). Association for Computational Linguistics.

Marks, Carolyn B., Doctorow, Marleen J., & Wittrock, M. C. (1974). Word frequency and reading
comprehension. The Journal of Educational Research, 67(6), 259–262.

Stirman, S. W., & Pennebaker, J. (2001). Word use
in the poetry of suicidal and nonsuicidal poets.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 63(4), 517–22.

McGlone, M., & Toﬁghbakhsh, J. (2000). Birds of
a feather ﬂock conjointly (?): Rhyme as reason in
aphorisms. Psychological Science, 11, 424–428.
Mohammad, S., & Turney, P. (2011). Crowdsourcing a word–emotion association lexicon. Computational Intelligence, 59(000), 1–24.
Paivio, A., Yuille, J., & Smythe, P. (1966). Stimulus and response abstractness, imagery, and meaningfulness, and reported mediators in pairedasscoiate learning. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 20(4).
Pennebaker, J., Francis, M., & Booth, R. J. (2001).
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC):
LIWC2001. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pitler, E., & Nenkova, A. (2008). Revisiting readability: A uniﬁed framework for predicting text
quality. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, (pp. 186–195).
Poulin, A., & Waters, M. (2006). Contemporary
American Poetry. Houghton Mifﬂin Company,
eighth ed.
Richards, I. (1893). Practical criticism: a study of
literary judgment. Transaction Publishers.
Rigau, J., Feixas, M., & Sbert, M. (2008). Informational aesthetics measures. In IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications.
Rubin, D. (1995). Memory in oral traditions:
The cognitive psychology of epic, ballads, and
counting-out rhymes. New York: Oxford University Press.
Silverman, M., & Will, N. (1986). Sylvia plath and
the failure of emotional self-repair through poetry.
Psychoanal Q, 55, 99–129.
Socher, R., Pennington, J., Huang, E., Ng, A., &
Manning, C. (2011). Semi-supervised recursive
autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-

Stone, P., Dunphry, D., Smith, M., & Ogilvie, D.
(1966). The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach to Content Analysis. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

