The Role of the Lemma in Form Variation
Daniel Jurafsky, Alan Bell, and Cynthia Girand
University of Colorado, Boulder
November 18, 2000

1

Introduction

A key problem in building a complete model of the lexicon is understanding the
complex relationship between semantically and syntactically deﬁned lexical entries
(‘lemmas’ in the terminology of Levelt (1983)), and phonological forms (‘wordforms’ or ‘lexemes’). One reason for the complexity is that the relationship is
not one-to-one. For example in homophones like still, a single wordform
is linked with many different lemmas, including verbs (‘to quiet’), nouns (‘equipment for distilling’ or ‘silence’), adverbs (‘yet’ or ‘nevertheless’), and adjectives
(‘silent’, ‘not moving’). The complementary situation of a single lemma linked
with multiple wordforms includes well-known instances of allomorphy such as the
realization of the English indeﬁnite article as a or an, or the deﬁnite article the as
or
.
In addition to such lexically based form variation, recent corpus-based studies
have shown extensive form variation in the pronunciations of what may be single
lemmas (Jurafsky et al., 1998; Bell et al., 1999). For example, the phonetically
transcribed Switchboard corpus (Greenberg et al., 1996) contains 33 pronunciations for the word the. Besides the two allomorphs
and
, most of the other
surface realizations are due to segmental and prosodic context and to production
factors like speaking rate. But in some cases, where multiple lemmas are mutually associated to a phonological form, it may be that the lemma difference plays
a role in the surface realization. The impressionistic summary of Roach (1983),
while noting the extensive contextual variation for most English function words,
describes lemma-based variation for different functions of that, some, there, and
must. Such a difference has been repeatedly noted between the pronoun that (That
was pretty heart-rending for her) and the complementizer that (I can’t say that I’m
an expert on the region) (Jones, 1947; Jespersen, 1933; Berkenﬁeld, 2000).
In this paper we examine the role of the lemma in explaining these kinds of
 §¥ £¡
©¨¦¤¢ 


 


 

 
¢ 

1

 
 

variation, focusing on four very frequent function words; to, that, of, and you. The
variation in these four function words provides a suitable locus for this study for
several reasons. First of all, they have distinguishable functions that are plausibly
instantiated as different lemmas. Second, the functions are plausibly assumed to
share phonological forms or lexemes. Third, they exhibit extensive surface variation. Fourth, they are very frequent, permitting enough observations to distinguish
the various sources of the variation. For example, the word to is very frequent
(occurring 68,352 times out of about 3 million words in Switchboard, thus consisting of about 2% of the word tokens), is commonly assumed to have a single
lexeme/wordform /tu/, has (at least) two lemmas—an inﬁnitive marker (we had to
do it) and a preposition (I would have gone to the store), and has a lot of surface
,
, ,
, etc.).
variation (appearing as
We also chose to investigate function words, rather than content words, because
function words are much less likely to receive sentence accent, which interacts
strongly with reduction, and which we could not control adequately in our corpus.
Note that the term function word is here no more than a convenient descriptive label; our study will not allow us to make any claims about, for example, differential
processing of function and content words, or the exact nature of the set of function
words.
When two or more lemmas systematically vary in their surface realizations
there are three main classes of explanations for the variation:
 ¢£   ¢£   £     £ 
£
¡


1. Contextual: The variation is due to contextual and production factors acting
on a single phonological form, as sketched in Figure 1.
2. Multiple lexeme: The variation is due to multiple phonological forms, possibly differentially linked to the lemmas (Figure 2).
3. Lemma-based: The variation is due to differences in the lemmas (e.g. frequency) sharing a single phonological form (Figure 3).
These explanations are of course not exclusive, and many combinations and variants are possible for any given case.
The contextual explanation, sketched in Figure 1, suggests that pronunciation
variation is not represented in any way in the lexicon. Rather, whatever variation
in wordform we see depends only on contextual factors such as prosodic, segmental or syntactic context, production factors like rate of speech, or sociolinguistic
factors. This explanation of variation appears to be the cause of most kinds of variation, if impressionistic summaries like Roach’s or the relative rarity of diachronic
homonym splits like that of New York and Philadelphia can are any guide (Ferguson, 1975; Labov, 1989).
2

t o infinitive

lemma

t o preposition
other
context

lexeme

/tu/
[t tH tö t« tP tÃ tU tu]

pronunciation

Figure 1: The contextual model: two lemmas share a wordform but there is no
effect of these different lemmas on wordform variation. Variation is accounted
for solely by effects of context not mediated through the lemma or through the
wordform.

sum

lemma

some
some
specific

some
indefinite

lexeme

/sÃm/

/s«m/

pronunciation

[sÃm s«m sm` s«)]

Figure 2: The multiple lexeme model. Different lemmas are linked in overlapping
ways to different wordforms.
An example of the multiple lexeme explanation is given by the various senses
of the word some (and the homonym sum), shown in Figure 2. Roach (1983)
points out that there are pronunciation differences between two senses of some,
the speciﬁc some animal broke it and the indeﬁnite have some more tea. These
differences are most directly accounted for by assuming that indeﬁnite some is
linked to two wordforms
and
, while speciﬁc some is linked only to
. (Sum is also of course linked only to
.) Figure 2 sketches this kind
of lemma effect.
Similarly, although the split between the New York and Philadelphia English
noun can (can of beans;
) and auxiliary can (can I;
) may have had
its original source in a prosodically conditioned longer noun can (perhaps also
abetted by its lower lexical frequency), it likely passed through a stage where the
two lemmas differentially selected multiple wordforms.
    £ ¡  

    £ ¢ 
¡

  ¨ 
§ © ¡

    ¤¢ 
¡

  ¨ ¦¤¢ 
§ ¥ £ ¡

3

    £ ¡  

lemma

.74

.26

t o infinitive

t o preposition

lexeme

pronunciation

/tu/
[t tH tö t« tP tÃ tU tu]

Figure 3: The lemma-based model: Two lemmas share a wordform and some of
the wordform variation is accounted for by the effects of lemma differences (such
as frequency) on lexical access and/or other production processes. The lemmas too
and too are omitted.
The lemma-based explanation, sketched in Figure 3, assumes that the variation
in surface form is somehow caused directly by a property of the different lemmas,
such as their frequencies. For example, if the lemmas differ in frequency, this
difference might account for some of the surface variation, even though they share
a single phonological form. One way that this might happen is for less frequent
lemmas, being accessed more slowly, to sometimes slow up one or more of the
steps in the phonetic encoding process. We will call this the lemma frequency
hypothesis.
The lemma frequency hypothesis is not compatible with current phonological theory and most models of speech production, which generally assume that
multiple lemmas have no direct effect on surface variation (Levelt et al., 1999).
Furthermore, previous research such as Jescheniak and Levelt (1994) has argued
convincingly that the wordform and not the lemma is the major locus of frequency
effects in the lexicon, at least so far as they affect lexical access speed in production. Still, we feel it is worth examining the lemma frequency effect. One main
reason is that there is robust evidence for a lemma frequency effect in comprehension. For example Hogaboam and Perfetti (1975), Simpson (1981), Simpson and
Burgess (1985), and many more recent studies have found that the rate of rise in
activation for a particular lemma in comprehension is a function of the lemma’s
relative frequency. Since there are many differences between lexical comprehension and production, it is crucial to understand exactly which kinds of frequency
effects are not symmetric in this way.
A second reason to investigate the lemma frequency effect is that an initial,
raw measurement of word durations does seem to give preliminary evidence of a

4

frequency effect. For example, as we will show below, in our corpus the more
frequent inﬁnitive lemma for to is much shorter on average (with an average raw
length of 110 ms) than the less frequent preposition lemma for to (with an average raw length of 140 ms). Berkenﬁeld (2000) found similar relations between
frequency and shorter duration for the word that in a different speech corpus.
Lemma frequency is also a convenient avatar for general lemma effects because
in addition to predicting that the lemma will affect the reduction of the wordform,
it makes a more speciﬁc prediction about the direction of the reduction: more
frequent lemmas will have shorter wordforms.

2

Methodology

This paper is based on a new corpus-based methodology to explore the interaction of frequency, lemma, and wordform. Our method is to show how various
frequency factors affect the duration, reduction, or lenition of words in a corpus.
That is, rather than using carefully controlled materials in production studies in
laboratory settings, we use a very large database of natural speech and use multiple
regression to control for factors that inﬂuence the duration or reduction of words.
Our study is based on the Switchboard corpus of 2430 telephone conversations
between strangers, collected in the early 1990s (Godfrey et al., 1992).
We coded each instance of the four words to, that, of, and you for their different syntacto-semantic lemmas. For example, we investigated four different thats:
(complementizer, pronoun, determiner, and relative pronoun) and two different tos
(preposition, inﬁnitive marker). Lists and examples of each sense are given below. The different lemmas of a word may differ in frequency. The inﬁnitive to, for
example, is about 3 times as frequent as the preposition to.
The phonological variable we used to study these parts of speech was the reduction or lenition of the word’s pronunciation in conversational speech. Based on
our previous work (Jurafsky et al., 1998; Bell et al., 1999) we coded three measures
of reduction for that, to, of, and you: duration in milliseconds, reduced vowel, and
deletion of ﬁnal consonants
In earlier work (Jurafsky et al., 2001), we have shown that this methodology is
quite sensitive to word frequency. In natural speech, frequent words are shorter in
duration, have a greater proportion of reduced vowels, and are more likely to have
deleted coda consonants than rarer words. This effect holds even after controlling
for the many factors that we and others have shown inﬂuence reduction in function
words, including the speaker’s rate of speech (in syllables per second), whether the
speaker was having planning problems (as indicated by neighboring disﬂuencies),
the position of the function word in the utterance, the segmental context, the contextual predictability of the function word, and sociolinguistic factors such as age
and sex.
5

In the experiments described in this paper, then, we controlled all our data for
these factors and then tested whether the more frequent lemma (e.g., the inﬁnitive
to) was shorter than the less frequent lemma (e.g., the preposition to). Since we did
see such a difference in raw durations (for example inﬁnitive to is in fact shorter
on average than preposition to) we expected to see this difference after controlling
for other factors.
2.1

The Switchboard dataset

Our dataset of the four function words was drawn from the Switchboard corpus
of telephone conversations between strangers, collected in the early 1990s (Godfrey et al., 1992). The corpus contains 2430 conversations averaging 6 minutes
each, totaling 240 hours of speech and about 3 million words spoken by over 500
speakers. The corpus was collected at Texas Instruments, mostly by soliciting paid
volunteers who were connected to other volunteers via a robot telephone operator.
Conversations were then transcribed by court reporters into a word-by-word text.
Approximately four hours of speech from these conversations were phonetically hand-transcribed by students at UC Berkeley (Greenberg et al., 1996) as
follows. The speech ﬁles were automatically segmented into pseudo-utterances at
turn boundaries or at silences of 500 ms or more, and a rough automatic phonetic
transcription was generated. The transcribers were given these utterances along
with the text and rough phonetic transcriptions. They then corrected the phonetic
transcription, using an augmented version of the ARPAbet, and marked syllable
boundaries, from which durations of each syllable were computed.
This phonetically transcribed corpus, contains roughly 38,000 transcribed words
(tokens). Our total dataset is drawn from the set of all instances of of, that, you,
and to, after screening for transcription errors. Each of our analyses of reduction
are based on the tokens remaining after excluding various non-comparable items,
as explained below in section 2.3.
Each observation was coded for two or three factors reﬂecting reduction:
vowel reduction: We coded the vowel of each function word as full or reduced.
The full vowels included basic citation or clariﬁcation pronunciations, e.g.
for the, as well as other non-reduced vowels. The reduced vowels that
occurred in the function words were
and .1 Table 1 shows full and
reduced-vowel pronunciations of the four words.
  


 ¡


 

duration: the duration of the word in milliseconds.
1
In general we relied on Berkeley transcriptions for our coding, although we did do some data
cleanup, including eliminating some observations we judged likely to be in error; see Jurafsky et al.
(1998) for details.

6

coda obstruent deletion: for that and of, whether the word-ﬁnal obstruent was
deleted.

©¡  
£
©¡  
 £ 

 


   ¥   ¥      
¦¥§¨©   £¨©   ©   ©   £ ©  
¨
 £ £   ¥ £  §£     ¥ 
 ¦
 
 ¢     ¥   ¡  £   £ 


,

Reduced
, ,
, ,
,
,
, ,
 
 
 ¢£ 
¡
   

Full
, ,
, ,
,
, ,
,
,
,
, ,
, ,


©¡ 
¦¡    ¡
¥

 
 ¤ 
£

   
 © 
   £
   £

of
to
that
you

Table 1: Common pronunciations of the four function words by vowel type.
2.2 The regression analysis
We used multiple regression to evaluate the effects of our predictability factors
on reduction. A regression analysis is a statistical model that predicts a response
variable (in this case, the word duration, the frequency of vowel reduction, or
the frequency of coda deletion) based on contributions from a number of other
explanatory factors (Agresti, 1996). Thus when we report that an effect was signiﬁcant, it is meant to be understood that it is a signiﬁcant parameter in a model
that also includes the other signiﬁcant variables. In other words, after accounting
for the effects of the other explanatory variables, adding the explanatory variable
in question produced a signiﬁcantly better account of the variation in the response
variable. For duration, which is a continuous variable, we used ordinary linear
regression to model the log duration of the word. For vowel quality and coda deletion, which are categorical variables, we used logistic regression.
All of the analyses assume that the items of the sample are independent. This
is not strictly true, since some of the function words come from the same pseudoutterances (and more generally, from the same conversations). We do not expect
that this would inﬂuence the results much, but it does mean that the signiﬁcance
levels we report are somewhat overstated, and hence they should be interpreted
with caution.
2.3 Control factors
The reduction processes are each inﬂuenced by multiple structural and performance factors that must be controlled to assess the contribution of lexical category
to reduction. We brieﬂy review these factors here and our method of controlling
for them. First, we excluded tokens of of, you, to, and that based on the following
three factors:
special forms: We excluded cliticized words (e.g., you’ve, that’s, etc.), Such forms
made up about nine percent of the total occurrences of the four function
7

words; tokens of that’s accounted for almost 80 percent of the excluded
items. Also excluded were about 100 items whose extreme or aberrant parameter values indicated a high likelihood of coding error.
prosodic position: We removed words which began or ended the pseudo-utterances
of our dataset, because of the incomparability of the predictability measures
for such items and their high correlation with special prosodic contexts. Such
words made up about 14 percent of the items. Recall that these conversational fragments were bounded either by turns or long pauses. Thus all
turn-initial and turn-ﬁnal items were excluded. Many items that were initial
or ﬁnal in an intonational phrase would also have been excluded, leaving
only such items that fell within the pseudo-utterances. Based on two subsamples of the data coded for prosodic units, we estimate that perhaps 10
percent of the remaining data consists of items that were initial or ﬁnal in the
intonational phrase.
planning problems: Previous work has shown that when words are followed or
preceded by disﬂuencies indicating planning problems (pauses, ﬁlled pauses
uh and um, or repetitions), their pronunciations are less reduced (Fox Tree
& Clark, 1997; Jurafsky et al., 1998; Bell et al., 1999; Shriberg, 1999).
Partly for this reason and partly because the interpretation of the predictability variables in such contexts was unclear, these items, about 18 percent of
the remaining data, were excluded.
We then controlled other variables known or suspected to affect reduction by
entering them ﬁrst in the regression model. Thus the full base model for an analysis
was a regression on the following set of control factors:
rate of speech: Speech researchers have long noted the association between faster
speech, informal styles, and more reduced forms. For a recent quantitative account of rate effects in Switchboard, see Fosler-Lussier and Morgan
(2000). We measured rate of speech at a given function word by taking the
number of syllables per second in the smallest pause-bounded region containing the word. Our regression models all included log rate; log squared
rate, found to be a signiﬁcant factor in our work with larger samples, was
included in models where it was an appreciable factor.
segmental context: A general fact about reduction processes is that the form of a
word is inﬂuenced by the segmental context—for example, consonant deletion is favored when a segment is preceded by or followed by a consonant.
We controlled for the class (consonant or vowel) of the following segment.
8

For vowel reduction, we also controlled for whether the target syllable was
open or closed (e.g., it vs. to), since we know from studies in larger samples
that this variable interacts closely with segmental context (the later factor
was ignored in some regressions where its effect was negligible).
Reduction of following vowel: The prosodic pattern of the utterance plays a crucial role in reduction. Since our current dataset does not mark stress or accent, the only prosodic control was whether the vowel in the syllable following the target word was reduced or full. (This partially controls for stress
since the reduction of the following vowel should correlate with its stress
level, and hence the stress level of the target word.)
Probability of word given neighboring words: In earlier work (Jurafsky et al.,
2001), we showed that the conditional probability of a word given the previous and following words played an important role in its reduction. We
therefore included four probabilistic control factors: the conditional probability of the target word given the previous word, the joint probability of the
target word with the previous word, the conditional probability of the target
word given the following word, and the joint probability of the target word
given the following word. The next section summarizes the deﬁnitions of
these probabilities and the effects we found in this earlier work.
We also included terms for some of the interactions between these variables where
their effect was appreciable.
Several factors that have been reported to inﬂuence reduction were not controlled in this study. First, our deﬁnition of words was quite simpliﬁed; we assume
that anything bounded by spaces in the text transcriptions was a word. Thus most
of, for example, was taken to be two words.
Other factors not controlled included the segmental environment of the preceding word, ﬁner details of the the segmental environment of the following word, i.e.
register, age, sex, and social class. We expect that the remaining segmental factors
would have relatively little effect on duration or on the role of the predictability
measures, but we have not examined this possibility. When we controlled for some
social variables in earlier work (Bell et al., 1999), the effects on reduction were
relatively small and the robust effects of the predictability measures were little diminished. The effects of prosodic structure, stress, and accent are only partially
and indirectly controlled by the variable of reduction in the following vowel and
the exclusion of beginnings and ends of pseudo-utterances. Work in progress in
which we controlled for an approximation to position in the intonational phrase
showed that while initial and ﬁnal tokens in this domain were signiﬁcantly longer,

9

controlling for these items had little effect on the predictability measures. The
effect of pitch accent is discussed below in section 3.4.
2.4

Effects of probability of word given neighboring words

Jurafsky et al. (2001) proposed the Probabilistic Reduction Hypothesis: Word
forms are reduced when they have a higher probability. In that paper we showed
speciﬁcally that target words which have a higher probability given neighboring
words are shorter. We use two measures (the joint probability and the conditional
probability) of the predictability of a word given the previous and given the following word. The joint probability of two words
may be thought of as the
prior probability of the two words taken together, and is estimated by just looking
at the relative frequency of the two words together in a corpus:

¥ £¨ ¥ ¡
©¤§¦¤£¢ 


¥ £¨ ¥   ¥ £¨ ¥ ¡
©¤§¤£¡ ©¤§¤£¢ 

(1)

The conditional probability of a word given the previous word is also sometimes called the transitional probability (Bush, 1999; Saffran et al., 1996). The
given a previous word
conditional probability of a particular target word
is estimated from a sufﬁciently large corpus, by counting the number of times the
two words occur together
, and dividing by
, the number of
times that the ﬁrst word occurs:

¨ ¥
©¤§!£

¥ £

¨ ¥
%©$§!¤£¡ 

¥ £¨ ¥
#"©¤§!¤£¡ 

¨ ¥
%©¤§¤£¡   ¨ & ¡
¥ £¨ ¥
©$§¤£¡  ' ©¤§¥ £ ¥ ¤£¢ 

(2)

The difference between the conditional and joint probability is that the conditional probability controls for the frequency of the conditioning word. For example, pairs of words can have a high joint probability merely because the individual
words are of high frequency (e.g., of the). The conditional probability would be
high only if the second word was particularly likely to follow the ﬁrst. Most measures of word cohesion, such as conditional probability and mutual information,
are based on such metrics which control for the frequencies of one or both of the
words (Manning & Sch¨ tze, 1999).
u
In addition to considering the preceding word, we measured the effect of the
following word by the two corresponding probabilities. The joint probability of a
word with the next word
is estimated by the relative frequency of the
two words together:

 0)(¥ ¥£ ¤£¢ 
¡
¨


 ¨ ¥ ¥ ¡
¨ ¥ ¥
%01(¤£¤£¡  %01(¤£¤£¢ 

(3)

 0)(¥ £ ¥ ¤£¢ 
¨ & ¡

Similarly, the conditional probability of the target word given the next word
is the probability of the target word
given the next word
. This may be

¨ ¥
0)(£

¥
¦£

10

viewed as the predictability of a word given the word the speaker is about to say,
and is estimated as follows:
(4)

 0)(¥ ¤£¡    ¨ ¥ ¥ ¡
¨
 0)($£¤£¡  '%0)( &£ ¤£¢ 
¨ ¥ ¥

Jurafsky et al. (2001) showed that all of these measures played a role in reduction; words which were highly probable by any of these measures were shorter,
more likely to have a reduced vowel, and more likely to have a deleted consonant.
Since our 38,000 word corpus was far too small to estimate word probabilities,
we used the entire 2.4 million word Switchboard corpus (from which our corpus
was drawn) instead. See Jurafsky et al. (1998) for details about the backoff and
discounting methods that we used to smooth the estimates of very low frequency
items. We then took the log of these probabilities for use in our regression analyses.
2.5 Earlier results on sensitivity of our methodology to lexical frequency
The hypothesis that more frequent forms are more likely to be reduced in lexical
production has been widely proposed (Schuchardt, 1885; Jespersen, 1922; Zipf,
1929; Martinet, 1960; Oldﬁeld & Wingﬁeld, 1965; Fidelholz, 1975; Hooper, 1976;
Phillips, 1984; Jescheniak & Levelt, 1994; Bybee, 2000; Rhodes, 1992, 1996).
In Jurafsky et al. (2001), we used our corpus-based methodology to examine
the role of various probabilistic measures, including lexical frequency, on reduction. We examined 2042 tokens of words ending in t or d, again from the 38,000
word phonetically-transcribed Switchboard database. We examined two dependent
measures: the duration of the word in milliseconds (only for monosyllabic words)
and deletion of the ﬁnal t or d. We found a strong effect of relative frequency on
). For duration, high frequency words (at the
both kinds of reduction (
95th percentile of frequency) were 18% shorter than low frequency words (at the
5th percentile) and high frequency words (at the 95th percentile) were 2.0 times
more likely to have deleted ﬁnal t or d than the lowest frequency words (at the 5th
percentile).
These results suggest that our corpus-based methodology is indeed sensitive
to lexical frequency. But our previous results did not distinguish between lemma
frequency and wordform frequency. Testing the differential role of the two requires
labeling each wordform observation for its associated lemma. This coding process
is described in the next section.

¨¥¥ £ ¡
©§§¦¥¤¢ 

2.6 Coding for lexical category
We coded the four function words that, to, of, and you for their syntactic categories. In each case we coded ﬁne-grained categories which were then collapsed
into broader categories for our analyses. Tables 3–5 show examples of the different
lexical categories we coded for the four words.
11

Count
543
195
738

%
74%
26%
100%

Syntactic Category
inﬁnitive marker
preposition/particle
Total

Example from Switchboard
is that a tough system to be in?
she is a great comfort to me

Table 2: Lexical category coding for to.
For that, there are four traditional part-of-speech or syntactic category differences: determiner, pronoun, complementizer, and relativizer. Some previous studies of form variation have treated complementizers and relativizers together (Jespersen, 1933), while others have distinguished all four (Berkenﬁeld, 2000). We
chose to look at all four. We did not, however, study subtypes of these categories
such as the differences between subject and object pronouns, or between subject
and object relatives, mainly since neither the literature nor our intuitions gave us
any reason to expect a duration or reduction difference between subject and object
pronouns. But in order to make it clear what the categories encompass, we give
more details of subtypes of these categories in Table 3.
Count
294

183

%
37%

23%

Syntactic Category
pronoun
subject (105)
non-subject (189)
complement
verbal complement

verbal extraposition
nominal complement
170

21%

rel. pronoun
subject relative (101)
non-subj. relative (69)

102
42
791

13%
5%
100%

determiner
other
Total

Example from Switchboard
that didn’t help at all
and we keep thinking about that
like uh one company had proposed to me
that i could come back to work after having
the baby um
and uh it’s always occurred to me that
I just ﬁnished fuming at the fact that we pay
an eight and a half percent sales tax ...
found a bunch of memos that were uh supposedly from. . .
you get on a topic that you know you enjoy. . .
. . . and ﬁnes and things of that nature
idioms (that is), intensiﬁers, etc.

Table 3: Lexical category coding for that.
For of, the different lemmas are strongly related to the different syntactic con12

structions they can occur in, for example as the complement of a verb or preposition
(e.g., thought of, outside of) or as a partitive (e.g., some of, all of) (Table 4).
Count
230

%
40%

Syntactic Category
partitive

100
95

18%
17%

complement
genitive/other postnominal

146
561

26%
100%

assorted idioms
Total

Example from Switchboard
e.g., one of them, type of job, all of, some
of
e.g., thought of, outside of, in front of
e.g., friend of mine, matter of concern,
things of that nature
e.g., kind of, lot of, sort of, matter of fact

Table 4: Lexical category coding for of.
For you, we distinguished four potential lemmas. We considered the you of
the phrase you know, the referential pronoun you, and a non-referential or generic
pronoun you (yeah then you have to get up the next day and move it on). We also
distinguished auxiliary-inverted and non-inverted instances of the referential you
(Table 5).
Count
359
212
172
83
89
743

%
47%
27%

Syntactic Category
you know
generic

22%
11%
12%
100%

referential
aux-inverted
not aux-inverted
Total

Example from Switchboard
it was you know in the seventies
yeah then you have to get up the next day
and move it on
well do you drink soda and such?
and you only get one of them

Table 5: Lexical category coding for you.

3

Results

We ran separate regressions for each of the four words.
3.1

Effect of the lemma on variation in to

As Table 2 shows, the frequency of the inﬁnitive lemma was 2.8 times greater
than the frequency of the preposition lemma. If lemma frequency plays a role in
lexical production, as the lemma frequency hypothesis suggests, we would expect
the inﬁnitives to be shorter than the prepositions after controlling for other variables
in our regression. In addition, we would expect the inﬁnitives to have a greater
percentage of reduced vowels than the prepositions. If we look at the values of
13

tokens of the two lemmas in the corpus after excluding items but not controlling
for any other factors, this is indeed the case, as we see in Table 6.

Lemma
Inﬁnitive
Preposition

Proportion of
Occurrences
(percent)
74
27

Count
543
195

Average
Duration (ms)
109
138

Percent
Vowel
Reduction
78
56

Table 6: Lemma counts, proportions, raw durations, and raw percentage of reduced vowels for inﬁnitival and prepositional to. Lemma counts and proportions
are based on the total sample. Durations and reduced vowel percentages are based
on the sample after excluding non-comparable items.

¨¥¥
©§§¦¥£ ¡  

), and are
The differences in all three variables are highly signiﬁcant (
in the direction predicted by the lemma frequency hypothesis. We used a binomial
test for the lemma frequency difference (
). To examine the differences in
duration and in vowel reduction of the two categories, we made a planned comparison between the inﬁnitive and the preposition categories in linear regressions
for duration, and in logistic regressions for vowel reduction. These comparisons
yielded values of
for duration, and
for vowel
reduction.
These differences, however, are not controlled for factors known to inﬂuence
reduction. We thus added control variables for rate of speech and for following segmental context to the regression models. There remained a difference in duration
(
), and in vowel reduction (
)
between inﬁnitival and prepositional to. The inﬁnitives were shorter in duration
and had a greater probability of having a reduced vowel.
Still not controlled in these comparisons are the effects of local predictability.
We therefore included four local predictability variables into our base model for
the regression:

£ 

¥ £
¦ ¤ ¢ 
¡


£ ¨ ¥   ¨ ¡ 

£


¦

 
 ¥


¦¥£ ¡   ¨ £ £ ©   ¨ ¡ 

 © ¨
  £ ¢¨ ¡

§

¥¥
§§¦¥£    ¢ £¨ !¨    ¢¨ ¡
¨ ¥
 © ¨

©
"

©
"

§

1.
2.
3.
4.

Joint probability of target and previous word
Joint probability of target and following word
Conditional probability of target given following word
Conditional probability of target given previous word

After adding these variables, there remained no effect of the lemma categories on
either duration or vowel reduction (
). That is, there was no
difference between the duration or vowel quality of inﬁnitive to and preposition to.
This was a surprising result, as the difference in raw durations was so large.

£¨ ¨ 

¨ ¡

 ¢
¨

14

§

3.2

The roles of predictability and lemma category

The fact that no effect of lexical category remains after controlling for predictability implies that there must be some connection between lemma category and predictability. And indeed there is. The average conditional probability of prepositional to given the following word is 0.032, whereas the average conditional probability of inﬁnitival to is 0.190. That is, inﬁnitival to is more predictable. We might
further inquire, however, about the symmetry of the relationship. Are lexical category and predictability here merely correlated, so that either is an equally good
predictor of reduction?
Or is predictability a separate factor, whether we categorize the data by lemma
or not? This latter model is what was suggested by our earlier work in which we
found a robust effect of predictability on reduction throughout a very wide range
of word classes, word frequencies, and word contexts.
We tested whether predictability is a separate factor by examining the effect
of predictability after controlling for lemma. As we expected, the predictability
variables remain highly signiﬁcant. This means that predictability completely accounts for any predictive power that the lemma variable offers, and offers further
explanatory power, e.g. it accounts for the reduction of tokens within each of the
two lemma categories. This suggests that predictability and not lemma is the factor
accounting for the difference between surface pronunciations of to.
In other words, the lemma categories only appeared to account for the reduction
and duration difference for to because it happens that the more reduced inﬁnitival
tos are also more predictable.
3.3

Lexical categories of of

Recall that the lexical categories for of included complements (thought of), partitives (one of them), genitives/postnominals (friend of mine), and high-frequency
idioms kind of, sort of). Their frequencies, average durations, and average coda
deletion are summarized in Table 7. The lemmas did not differ in frequency of
vowel reduction.2
The frequency of partitives is obviously much greater than that of complements
and genitive/postnominals, whose frequencies do not differ signiﬁcantly.
To examine the differences in the durations and coda deletion of the categories,
we made planned comparisons between the frequent partitive and the other two categories, and then between the latter two categories, using contrast variables in linear regressions for duration, and in logistic regressions for coda deletion. Partitives
2

The two frequent idioms kind of and sort of, which constituted 12% of the tokens, are not compared here, since they may well be acting as a lexicalized category on their own, rather than playing
the part of partitives or genitives. However, the duration of of in these idioms is shorter (74 ms) and
they have more frequent deletion of the coda (64%).

15

Lemma
Partitive
Complement
Genitive/Postnominal

Count
230
100
95

Proportion of
Occurrences
(percent)
54
24
22

Average
Duration (ms)
82
94
103

Percent
Coda
Deletion
55
39
38

Table 7: Lemma counts, proportions, raw durations, and raw percentage of deleted
codas for of. Lemma counts and proportions are based on the total sample. Durations and reduced vowel percentages are based on the sample after excluding
non-comparable items.

¨¡


   ¨ ¦£ !¨ 

 

¨¥
©§¦¥£ ¡   ¨ ¦¥£ §¨ 
¨

¨ £
 £ ¢ §
¨

differ from complements/genitives both for raw duration (
) and raw proportion of coda deletion (
). The
differences between complements and genitives are not signiﬁcant. Note that the
lemma frequency hypothesis predicts that partitives should be shorter and more reduced than complements and shorter and more reduced than genitives, which is the
case.
When we control for rate and contextual factors (without predictability), both
) and coda deletion (
)
duration (
remain signiﬁcant. Finally, controlling also for predictability, we still found effects
of lemma on coda deletion, but not on duration (
). Partitives were marginally
more likely to have deleted codas than the combination of complements and genitives (
).3
These results suggest that surface pronunciations of the (more frequent) partitive lemma for of are more reduced than surface pronunciations of the (less frequent) complement or genitive lemmas. While the predictability variables completely eliminated any lemma effect for to, this was not the case for of.

¥¥
§§¦¥£ ¡   £ ¨   ¨ ¡ 

©
"

¨¥¥
 ©§§¦¥£

 

¨ ¡



¨¥¥
£
 ©§§¦¥£    ¨ ¦© ¨  ¨

¨¡

¨
£ ¢

§

§

¦¥£ ¡   ¢ £¨ © ' ¨ ¡ 
¨
 

©
"

3.4

Lexical categories of that

The frequencies, average durations, average reductions, and average coda deletion
of the four major lexical categories of that are summarized in Table 8.
From Table 8 we observe that the pronoun that is the most frequent of the
four lemmas of that that we consider, and the determiner or demonstrative that is
the least frequent, with relative marker that and complementizer that falling in between. All the frequency differences between the categories are signiﬁcant except
for that between complements and relative markers ( from 4.1 to 9.6,
).
Berkenﬁeld (2000) investigated the durations of these same four lemmas for 305

¨¥¥
©§§¦¥£ ¡  

¡  

3

In all of these comparisons, we included the frequent and probably lexicalized lot of in the
partitive category. These tokens made up 20% of the total sample of partitives. Analyses on this
smaller restricted set of partitives showed little difference from those reported here.

16

Lemma
Pronoun
Relative
Complementizer
Determiner

Count
294
170
183
102

Proportion of
Occurrences
(percent)
37
21
23
13

Average
Duration (ms)
186
132
154
142

Percent
Vowel
Reduction
2
18
22
0

Percent
Coda
Deletion
56
50
43
75

Table 8: Lemma counts, proportions, raw durations, and raw percentage of reduced
vowels and deleted codas for that. Lemma counts and proportions are based on the
total sample. Durations and deleted coda and reduced vowel percentages are based
on the sample after excluding non-comparable items.
observations of that in a corpus of conversational speech taken from the television
program The Newshour with Jim Lehrer. She found a similar ranking of the raw
durations, although not quite the same. In her data, as in ours, pronouns were
longest. But in her data determiners were the next longest, followed by complementizers, with relative clause markers the shortest. That is, in her data, determiners and relative clause markers are switched in their order from our Switchboard
data. Berkenﬁeld (2000) also found that while the pronoun lemma for that was
the most frequent in Switchboard, it was the complementizer lemma that was by
far the most frequent in written corpora like the Brown corpus (Francis & Kuˇ era,
c
1982), and news programs like the Lehrer Newshour. Thus it is not clear what the
correct prediction would be of the lemma frequency hypothesis.
All corpora agree, however, that the determiner lemma is the least frequent. It is
also less likely to have a reduced vowel than complementizers or relative markers.
This difference cannot be attributed to rate, contextual factors, or predictability; it
remains highly signiﬁcant after controlling for these factors (
). The duration and likelihood of coda deletion of determiners, however, do
not differ signiﬁcantly from complementizers or relative markers.
Pronouns appear to be much like determiners in that they, too, are less likely
to have reduced vowels than the complementizers and relative markers. But unlike
determiners, they are longer than the other lemmas (including determiners) after
accounting for the control factors (
). They do not
differ in likelihood of coda deletion.
Complementizers are less reduced than relative markers: they are longer (
) and marginally less likely to have deleted codas (
); but they do not differ in likelihood of vowel reduction.
It may be that the occurrence of accent is an important factor in these results.
While we do not have enough data coded for accent to control for this factor, a small

¡   ¨ ¦©£
¨ 
¨¦¡  § ¡

¥

 

 ¨¡ 



¨¥¥
©§§¦¥£

¨¥¥
©§§¦¥£ ¡   ¨ £ £ ¥ ¥   ¨ ¥  ¢¨ ¡
¨

¨
¢

§

© ¥
"¦£ ¡   ¢ £¨ ©
¨
¥
§¦¥£ ¡   ¨ ¦¥£    !¨ 


©
"



17

portion of the Switchboard corpus has been coded for accent under the direction of
Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel and Mari Ostendorf. They generously made an alpharelease of their accent-coded corpus available to us, and we examined the overlap
between their corpus and ours, a small subset consisting of 10 percent or less of our
entire dataset. There were 180 tokens of our four function words in this sample, if
we include the disﬂuent contexts. Of these, 16 were accented. Only thats received
accent at all frequently, 10 out of the 36 tokens coded; Ofs were accented once out
of 45 tokens; tos, once out of 53; yous, 4 times out of 46. This is encouraging in
that it affords some conﬁdence that the results for of and to are unlikely to be much
inﬂuenced by accent.
Of the 36 tokens of that coded for pitch accent, only the determiners (4 accented of 11) and the pronouns (6 of 14) received accent; not surprisingly, all
accent-coded occurrences of complementizers and relative markers were unaccented. However, it appeared that the disﬂuent contexts favored accent somewhat.
In ﬂuent contexts, only two of eight determiners and two of nine pronouns were
accented. Although, for example, the average duration of the accented pronominal
thats was longer than the duration of the unaccented ones (256 ms versus 142 ms),
the sample is simply too small to demonstrate signiﬁcant differences of duration
either for the accent or lemma categories.
Until the inﬂuence of accent can be further determined, any conclusions about
pronunciation differences linked to that lemmas must remain guarded. The lesser
reduction found for determiners is surely affected to some extent by the presence of
accented items, and is in any case suspicious without any accompanying difference
in duration. At least for pronouns there are strong effects both for reduction and
duration, but until the factor of accent can be controlled, we can only conjecture
that a noncontextual effect may exist. The relatively weak difference in duration
between complementizers and relative markers remains, however, since accent is
unlikely to account for any difference between them.
3.5

Lexical categories of you

Unlike the other three words, the two main lemmas we investigated for you (the
referential and the generic/nonreferential) did not differ signiﬁcantly in raw duration or reduction. None of the differences in duration or vowel reduction between
generic and referential lemmas shown in Table 9 are signiﬁcant.
After controlling for the base model including predictability, the items were
still the same; referential and non-referential observations of you did not differ in
surface pronunciation.

18

Lemma
You know
Generic, non-referential
Referential

Count
359
211
172

Proportion of
Occurrences
(percent)
47
27
22

Average
Duration (ms)
105
109
118

Percent
Vowel
Reduction
49
26
22

Table 9: Lemma counts, proportions, raw durations, and raw percentage of reduced
vowels for you. Lemma counts and proportions are based on the total sample.
Durations and reduced vowel percentages are based on the sample after excluding
non-comparable items.

4

Summary

For the word to, we found no separate effect whatsoever of the lemma for wordform variation. That is, we could account for most or all of the variation in surface
form of to, solely based on the control factors described above. The most important such control factor was the predictability of the word given the neighboring
words. When this factor was included in our regression, it accounted for all of the
differences between the different surface realizations of to.
While we found no evidence for a lemma effect for to, we did ﬁnd a lemma
effect for of, even after controlling for predictability. The partitive of (one of them)
is more likely to have a deleted coda than the genitive of (friend of mine) and the
complement of (to think of). Since the partitive is also more frequent, the direction
of the difference is consistent with the hypothesis that the more frequent lemma
will show more reduction.
Our results on that are inconclusive. First, after controlling for predictability
and other factors, the pronoun that (thinking about that) is longer and more likely
to have a full vowel than the relative (a topic that you enjoy) or complementizer
that (proposed to me that I could). Second, the determiner that (things of that
nature) was more likely to have a full vowel than the complementizer or relative
that. Both these differences, though, are clearly related to prosody; the pronoun
that and the determiner that are both much more likely to receive accent than the
complementizer or relative marker.
The third result with that is less likely to be inﬂuenced by accent. The relativizer sense of that is shorter and has more coda deletion than the slightly less
frequent complementizer sense of that. This difference is unlikely to be caused by
lemma frequency, since the relative frequencies of the complementizer and relativizer lemmas were not signiﬁcantly different.
Finally, we found no effects of lemma on the word you.

19

5

Conclusions

We investigated the role that lemmas play in wordform variation, using a corpusbased methodology which is sensitive to lexical frequency effects. Raw duration
and reduction measures seem to show differences between the surface forms corresponding to different lemmas for the words of, that, and to. But after controlling
for such factors as rate of speech, segmental context, neighboring disﬂuencies, and,
crucially, predictability from neighboring words, almost all of these differences disappeared. For example, the difference between inﬁnitive and prepositional lemmas
of to turned out to be explained by word-predictability factors that we had shown to
predict reduction in earlier work (Jurafsky et al., 2001). In summary, after appropriate controls, we found no differences whatsoever in surface form for you or to
that could be attributed to lemmas. There were also no differences due to lemmas
in duration or vowel reduction for of.
Although we were able to account for most of the differences between surface
forms of different lemmas via these contextual factors, four differences remained
signiﬁcant even after controlling for these factors. As the previous section suggested, two of these, the less reduced forms of the determiner and pronominal
lemmas for that, may turn out to actually be effects of pitch accent.
Thus two differences remained. First, the frequent partitive sense of of was
more likely to have a deleted coda than the less frequent genitive or complement
senses. Second, the relativizer sense of that is shorter and has more coda deletion
than the equally frequent complementizer sense of that.
The fact that these two differences remained despite our control for context
suggests that the contextual model of lexeme variation may not be sufﬁcient to
explain pronunciation variation. The contextual model predicts that all variation in
surface pronunciation should be accounted for by context or by production factors,
and that neither the lemma nor the lexeme should have a role. This model is not
sufﬁcient to explain the variation we see in of and that.
But the differences in of and that are also not compatible with the lemma frequency model of form variation. The relativizer and complement lemmas for that
have the same frequency, but still differ in duration and coda deletion percentage.
Even the result for of, where the more frequent partitive had more coda deletion
than the rarer genitive and complementizers, is not strong evidence for the lemma
frequency model. This is because if the reduction of of is caused by frequency, we
would also expect reduction differences between other lemmas whose frequency
difference is as great as the difference in of. The frequency ratio between the partitive and complement/genitive lemmas for of is 2.4 to 1. But the frequency ratio
between the inﬁnitive and preposition lemmas for to is about the same (2.8 to 1),
but to shows no lemma-based effect on reduction.

20

Even if in time numerous instances of association of frequent lemmas with reduced non-contextual pronunciations were found, it does not follow that production
models should incorporate the lemma frequency hypothesis. The association would
more plausibly be accounted for by diachronic preferences rather than synchronic
structures. A homonym split could begin with a differentiation of pronunciations
that was at ﬁrst purely contextual, with reduced forms occurring in more frequent,
more predictable, and possibly less prosodically prominent constructions or contexts. If the contextual differences became lexicalized, this would lead to some of
the distinctions in reduction becoming encoded in the lexicon, and would leave an
association of more reduction with the more frequent lemmas.
Our conclusion that the lemma frequency hypothesis does not hold for speech
production is nicely consonant with the result of Jescheniak and Levelt (1994).
But it does point out an intriguing difference between lexical access in comprehension, where lemma frequency effects are robust and have been reported crosslinguistically (Li & Yip, 1996; Ahrens, 1998), and lexical access in production
(with, it seems, no lemma frequency effect). Lemma frequency, then, is a feature
that seems to play different roles in language comprehension and production, a fact
that should clearly be further studied.
Even if there is not sufﬁcient support for the lemma frequency hypothesis, it
is still necessary to consider whether there are cases which require the lemmabased model involving other factors than frequency. Diachronically, we assume
such differences would arise by lexicalization of contextual differences. The issue
is whether the differences are incorporated in the lexeme or in the lemma, i.e.
whether the multiple lexeme model or the lemma-based model applies.
Recall that the multiple lexeme model suggested that different lemmas are differentially linked in the lexicon to different wordforms. Perhaps, for example, as
and , but
shown in Figure 4, all lemmas for of are linked to the wordforms
the genitive or complement of is linked more preferentially to the wordform
,
while the partitive of is linked more preferentially to . Similarly, the relativizer
, while the complementizer sense
sense of that could be preferentially linked to
of that could be preferentially linked to
.
The multiple lexeme model might be able to handle such results. But recall
that the relativizer sense of that is also shorter than the complementizer sense of
that, even after controlling for the greater incidence of coda reduction. That is, the
difference between these two forms is not just purely representable as a segmental difference. This suggests that the speciﬁcations of wordforms includes more
phonetic detail than just phonological categories. We found a related result in our
earlier work (Jurafsky et al., 2001), where we showed that reduced forms of very
predictable words are shorter even after controlling for segmental changes (vowel
reduction or coda deletion).
 £

   £

   £

 £

 © 


¤£ ©  

21

lemma

o f partitive

/Ã/

lexeme

pronunciation

osome
fcomplement

[«

«v v`

o fgenitive

/Ãv/
Ã Ãv]

Figure 4: A possible multiple lexeme model of of, showing more coda deletion in
partitive of, and less coda deletion in genitive and complement of.
One recent approach to phonological representation and production does offer
a possible solution to these data. Pierrehumbert (2001) and others have recently
proposed exemplar-based models of phone and word production. In exemplarbased models, each category is stored in memory as a cloud of exemplars of that
category. Thus in Pierrehumbert’s model, for example, phones and words are both
stored as clouds of exemplars. Production of a phone or word takes place by randomly activating and then producing a particular exemplar. Pierrehumbert (2001)
then proposes that the production process is not quite random; in leniting contexts
it has a very slight bias in its selection process toward shorter forms. This models
the general historic tendency of words to lenite. Pierrehumbert’s model also predicts the effects of wordform frequency on reduction. A more frequent wordform
will produce more exemplars, each of which is very slightly biased toward reduction. Over time, the exemplar cloud of a very frequent word will tend to consist of
somewhat more reduced exemplars.
Such an exemplar-based model can explain the non-segmental nature of the differences we show in the production of that. Two lemmas, say the complementizer
and relativizer that, may begin with a direct mapping to a single wordform. Over
time, the lemmas may begin to be differentially mapped to different wordforms.
These wordforms may have a clear segmental difference, as shown in Figure 2 and
Figure 4, or the two wordforms may be segmentally identical. Either way, these
different wordforms would themselves consist of clouds of exemplars. The exemplars for the more frequent wordform would in general be more reduced than the
exemplars for the other; some of these reductions might be segmental, but many
might simply consist of slightly shorter durations for the individual phones in the
word. Such an exemplar-based model might also model our word predictability
effects by including some exemplar clouds for two-word or three-word phrases.

22

While this exemplar-based explanation is clearly only a vague and preliminary attempt at a model, it is an exciting possibility which we are studying further.
Such examples suggest that it will always be possible to explain any noncontextual variation with a multiple lexeme model, provided that it is sufﬁciently
elaborated. If so, there would be no need to resort to lemma-based models. The result of our study of lemma variation, therefore, is that there are cases which appear
to require more complex representations at the lexeme level than have been commonly assumed. Ultimately, of course, we require independent evidence, from controlled experiments or other sources, for models like that sketched in Figure 4, or
for models to account for variation at a ﬁner level of detail than traditional phonological categories.
We are currently working on adding further prosodically-coded data to the
accent-coded portion of Switchboard coded by Stefanie Shattuck-Hufnagel and
Mari Ostendorf, so as to be able to reanalyze the pronoun and determiner senses of
that after controlling for accent.
In addition to these conclusions about the process of lexical production, we
would like to end with a methodological insight. We hope to have shown that a
corpus-based methodology such as ours can augment traditional controlled psycholinguistic experiments to help provide insight into psychological processes like
lexical production. Corpus-based methods have the advantage of ecological validity. The difﬁculty with corpus-based methods, of course, is that every possible
confounding factor must be explicitly controlled in the statistical models. This requires time-consuming coding of data and extensive computational manipulations
to make the data usable. Creating a very large hand-coded corpus is difﬁcult, as we
saw with our inability to completely control for pitch accent for the word that. But
when such control is possible, a corpus provides natural data whose frequencies
and properties may be much closer to the natural task of language production than
experimental materials can be. Obviously, it is important not to rely on any single
method in studying human language; corpus-based study of lexical production is
merely one tool in the psycholinguistic arsenal, but one whose time, we feel, has
come.
Acknowledgements
This project was partially supported by the National Science Foundation via NSF IIS-9733067 and
IIS-9978025. Many thanks to Michelle Gregory, William D. Raymond, Eric Fosler-Lussier, Joan
Bybee, and Janet Pierrehumbert for fruitful discussions. We are also grateful to Stefanie ShattuckHufnagel and Mari Ostendorf, who generously took the time and effort to release to us a preliminary
version of their prosodically coded portion of Switchboard. Finally, we owe a particular debt of gratitude to one anonymous reviewer and to the editors of this volume, all of whom gave extraordinarily
helpful comments and spotted many errors and inconsistencies which greatly improved our paper.
Of course all remaining errors are our own.

23

References
Agresti, A. (1996). An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis. John Wiley &
Sons, New York.
Ahrens, K. V. (1998). Lexical ambiguity resolution: Languages, tasks, and timing.
In Hillert, D. (Ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Volume 31: Sentence Processing:
A Crosslinguistic Perspective. Academic Press, San Diego.
Bell, A., Jurafsky, D., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C., & Gildea, D. (1999). Forms
of English function words – Effects of disﬂuencies, turn position, age and
sex, and predictability. In Proceedings of ICPhS-99, pp. 395–398.
Berkenﬁeld, C. (2000). The role of syntactic constructions and frequency in the
realization of English that. Master’s thesis, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
Bush, N. (1999). The predictive value of transitional probability for word-boundary
palatalization in English. Master’s thesis, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM.
Bybee, J. L. (2000). The phonology of the lexicon: evidence from lexical diffusion.
In Barlow, M., & Kemmer, S. (Eds.), Usage-based Models of Language, pp.
65–85. CSLI, Stanford.
Ferguson, C. A. (1975). “Short a” in Philadelphia English. In Smith, E. (Ed.),
Studies in Linguistics in Honor of George L. Trager, pp. 259–274. Mouton,
The Hague.
Fidelholz, J. (1975). Word frequency and vowel reduction in English. In CLS-75,
pp. 200–213. University of Chicago.
Fosler-Lussier, E., & Morgan, N. (2000). Effects of speaking rate and word frequency on conversational pronunciations. To appear, Speech Communication.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Clark, H. H. (1997). Pronouncing “the” as “thee” to signal
problems in speaking. Cognition, 62, 151–167.
Francis, W. N., & Kuˇ era, H. (1982). Frequency Analysis of English Usage.
c
Houghton Mifﬂin, Boston.
Godfrey, J., Holliman, E., & McDaniel, J. (1992). SWITCHBOARD: Telephone
speech corpus for research and development. In IEEE ICASSP-92, San Francisco, pp. 517–520. IEEE.
24

Greenberg, S., Ellis, D., & Hollenback, J. (1996). Insights into spoken language
gleaned from phonetic transcription of the Switchboard corpus. In ICSLP96, Philadelphia, PA, pp. S24–27.
Hogaboam, T. W., & Perfetti, C. A. (1975). Lexical ambiguity and sentence comprehension. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 14, 265–274.
Hooper, J. B. (1976). Word frequency in lexical diffusion and the source of morphophonological change. In Christie, W. (Ed.), Current Progress in Historical Linguistics, pp. 96–105. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Jescheniak, J. D., & Levelt, W. J. M. (1994). Word frequency effects in speech
production: Retrieval of syntactic information and of phonological form.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20,
824–843.
Jespersen, O. (1922). Language. Henry Holt, New York.
Jespersen, O. (1933). Essentials of English Grammar.
Jones, D. (1947). An English Pronouncing Dictionary. E. P. Dutton and Company,
New York.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Fosler-Lussier, E., Girand, C., & Raymond, W. D. (1998).
Reduction of English function words in Switchboard. In ICSLP-98, Sydney,
Vol. 7, pp. 3111–3114.
Jurafsky, D., Bell, A., Gregory, M., & Raymond, W. D. (2001). Probabilistic
relations between words: Evidence from reduction in lexical production. In
Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of linguistic
structure. Benjamins, Amsterdam. To appear.
Labov, W. (1989). The exact description of the speech community: Short a in
Philadelphia. In Fasold, R., & Schiffrin, D. (Eds.), Language Change and
Variation, pp. 1–57. Georgetown University Press, Washington, D.C.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of lexical access in
speech production. Behavioral and Brain Science, 22(1), 1–75.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1983). Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Li, P., & Yip, M. C. (1996). Lexical ambiguity and context effects in spoken word
recognition: Evidence from Chinese. In COGSCI-96, pp. 228–232.
25

Manning, C. D., & Sch¨ tze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Lanu
guage Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Martinet, A. (Ed.). (1960). Elements of General Linguistics. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Oldﬁeld, R. C., & Wingﬁeld, A. (1965). Response latencies in naming objects.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 17, 273–281.
Phillips, B. S. (1984). Word frequency and the actuation of sound change. Language, 60(2), 320–342.
Pierrehumbert, J. B. (2001). Exemplar dynamics: Word frequency, lenition and
contrast. In Bybee, J., & Hopper, P. (Eds.), Frequency and the emergence of
linguistic structure. Benjamins, Amsterdam. To appear.
Rhodes, R. A. (1992). Flapping in American English. In Dressler, W. U.,
Prinzhorn, M., & Rennison, J. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 7th International
Phonology Meeting, pp. 217–232. Rosenberg and Sellier, Turin.
Rhodes, R. A. (1996). English reduced vowels and the nature of natural processes.
In Hurch, B., & Rhodes, R. A. (Eds.), Natural Phonology: The State of the
Art, pp. 239–259. Mouton de Gruyter, The Hague.
Roach, P. (1983). English Phonetics and Phonology. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996). Statistical cues in language
acquisition: Word segmentation by infants. In COGSCI-96, pp. 376–380.
¨
Schuchardt, H. (1885). Uber die Lautgesetze: Gegen die Junggrammatiker. Robert
Oppenheim, Berlin. Excerpted with English translation in Theo Vennemann
and Terence H. Wilbur, (Eds.), Schuchardt, the Neogrammarians, and the
Transformational Theory of Phonological Change, Athenaum Verlag, Frankfurt, 1972.
Shriberg, E. (1999). Phonetic consequences of speech disﬂuency. In Proceedings of
the International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (ICPhS-99), San Francisco,
Vol. I, pp. 619–622.
Simpson, G. B. (1981). Meaning dominance and semantic context in the processing
of lexical ambiguity. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20,
120–136.

26

Simpson, G. B., & Burgess, C. (1985). Activation and selection processes in the
recognition of ambiguous words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 11(1), 28–39.
Zipf, G. K. (1929). Relative frequency as a determinant of phonetic change. Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 15, 1–95.

27

