Linguistic Models for Analyzing and Detecting Biased Language
Marta Recasens
Stanford University
recasens@google.com

Cristian Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil
Stanford University
Max Planck Institute SWS

Dan Jurafsky
Stanford University
jurafsky@stanford.edu

cristiand@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Unbiased language is a requirement for
reference sources like encyclopedias and
scientiﬁc texts. Bias is, nonetheless, ubiquitous, making it crucial to understand its
nature and linguistic realization and hence
detect bias automatically. To this end we
analyze real instances of human edits designed to remove bias from Wikipedia articles. The analysis uncovers two classes
of bias: framing bias, such as praising or
perspective-speciﬁc words, which we link
to the literature on subjectivity; and epistemological bias, related to whether propositions that are presupposed or entailed in
the text are uncontroversially accepted as
true. We identify common linguistic cues
for these classes, including factive verbs,
implicatives, hedges, and subjective intensiﬁers. These insights help us develop features for a model to solve a new prediction
task of practical importance: given a biased sentence, identify the bias-inducing
word. Our linguistically-informed model
performs almost as well as humans tested
on the same task.

1

Introduction

Writers and editors of reference works such as
encyclopedias, textbooks, and scientiﬁc articles
strive to keep their language unbiased. For example, Wikipedia advocates a policy called neutral point of view (NPOV), according to which
articles should represent “fairly, proportionately,
and as far as possible without bias, all signiﬁcant views that have been published by reliable
sources” (Wikipedia, 2013b). Wikipedia’s style
guide asks editors to use nonjudgmental language,
to indicate the relative prominence of opposing
points of view, to avoid presenting uncontroversial

facts as mere opinion, and, conversely, to avoid
stating opinions or contested assertions as facts.
Understanding the linguistic realization of bias
is important for linguistic theory; automatically
detecting these biases is equally signiﬁcant for
computational linguistics. We propose to address both by using a powerful resource: edits in
Wikipedia that are speciﬁcally designed to remove
bias. Since Wikipedia maintains a complete revision history, the edits associated with NPOV tags
allow us to compare the text in its biased (before)
and unbiased (after) form, helping us better understand the linguistic realization of bias. Our work
thus shares the intuition of prior NLP work applying Wikipedia’s revision history (Nelken and Yamangil, 2008; Yatskar et al., 2010; Max and Wisniewski, 2010; Zanzotto and Pennacchiotti, 2010).
The analysis of Wikipedia’s edits provides valuable linguistic insights into the nature of biased
language. We ﬁnd two major classes of bias-driven
edits. The ﬁrst, framing bias, is realized by subjective words or phrases linked with a particular
point of view. In (1), the term McMansion, unlike
homes, appeals to a negative attitude toward large
and pretentious houses. The second class, epistemological bias, is related to linguistic features that
subtly (often via presupposition) focus on the believability of a proposition. In (2), the assertive
stated removes the bias introduced by claimed,
which casts doubt on Kuypers’ statement.
(1) a. Usually, smaller cottage-style houses have been demolished to make way for these McMansions.
b. Usually, smaller cottage-style houses have been demolished to make way for these homes.

(2) a. Kuypers claimed that the mainstream press in America tends to favor liberal viewpoints.
b. Kuypers stated that the mainstream press in America
tends to favor liberal viewpoints.

Bias is linked to the lexical and grammatical cues
identiﬁed by the literature on subjectivity (Wiebe
et al., 2004; Lin et al., 2011), sentiment (Liu et
al., 2005; Turney, 2002), and especially stance

or “arguing subjectivity” (Lin et al., 2006; Somasundaran and Wiebe, 2010; Yano et al., 2010;
Park et al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012). For example, like stance, framing bias is realized when
the writer of a text takes a particular position on
a controversial topic and uses its metaphors and
vocabulary. But unlike the product reviews or debate articles that overtly use subjective language,
editors in Wikipedia are actively trying to avoid
bias, and hence biases may appear more subtly,
in the form of covert framing language, or presuppositions and entailments that may not play as
important a role in other genres. Our linguistic
analysis identiﬁes common classes of these subtle
bias cues, including factive verbs, implicatives and
other entailments, hedges, and subjective intensiﬁers.
Using these cues could help automatically detect and correct instances of bias, by ﬁrst ﬁnding
biased phrases, then identifying the word that introduces the bias, and ﬁnally rewording to eliminate the bias. In this paper we propose a solution for the second of these tasks, identifying
the bias-inducing word in a biased phrase. Since,
as we show below, this task is quite challenging
for humans, our system has the potential to be
very useful in improving the neutrality of reference works like Wikipedia. Tested on a subset of
non-neutral sentences from Wikipedia, our model
achieves 34% accuracy—and up to 59% if the
top three guesses are considered—on this difﬁcult
task, outperforming four baselines and nearing humans tested on the same data.

2

Analyzing a Dataset of Biased
Language

We begin with an empirical analysis based on
Wikipedia’s bias-driven edits. This section describes the data, and summarizes our linguistic
analysis.1
2.1

The NPOV Corpus from Wikipedia

Given Wikipedia’s strict enforcement of an NPOV
policy, we decided to build the NPOV corpus,
containing Wikipedia edits that are speciﬁcally designed to remove bias. Editors are encouraged to
identify and rewrite biased passages to achieve a
more neutral tone, and they can use several NPOV
1

The data and bias lexicon we developed are available at
http://www.mpi-sws.org/˜cristian/Biased_
language.html

Data

Articles

Revisions

Words

Edits

Sents

Train
Dev
Test

5997
653
814

2238K
210K
260K

11G
0.9G
1G

13807
1261
1751

1843
163
230

Total

7464

2708K

13G

16819

2235

Table 1: Statistics of the NPOV corpus, extracted
from Wikipedia. (Edits refers to bias-driven edits, i.e., with an NPOV comment. Sents refers to
sentences with one-word bias-driven edit.)
tags to mark biased content.2 Articles tagged this
way fall into Wikipedia’s category of NPOV disputes.
We constructed the NPOV corpus by retrieving
all articles that were or had been in the NPOVdispute category3 together with their full revision
history. We used Stanford’s CoreNLP tools4 to tokenize and split the text into sentences. Table 1
shows the statistics of this corpus, which we split
into training (train), development (dev), and test.
Following Wikipedia’s terminology, we call each
version of a Wikipedia article a revision, and so an
article can be viewed as a set of (chronologically
ordered) revisions.
2.2

Extracting Edits Meant to Remove Bias

Given all the revisions of a page, we extracted the
changes between pairs of revisions with the wordmode diff function from the Diff Match and Patch
library.5 We refer to these changes between revisions as edits, e.g., McMansion > large home. An
edit consists of two strings: the old string that is
being replaced (i.e., the before form), and the new
modiﬁed string (i.e., the after form).
Our assumption was that among the edits happening in NPOV disputes, we would have a high
density of edits intended to remove bias, which we
call bias-driven edits, like (1) and (2) from Section 1. But many other edits occur even in NPOV
disputes, including edits to ﬁx spelling or grammatical errors, simplify the language, make the
meaning more precise, or even vandalism (Max
2
{{POV}}, {{POV-check}}, {{POV-section}}, etc.
Adding these tags displays a template such as “The neutrality
of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found
on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until the
dispute is resolved.”
3
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Category:All_NPOV_disputes
4
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/
corenlp.shtml
5
http://code.google.com/p/google-diffmatch-patch

and Wisniewski, 2010). Therefore, in order to extract a high-precision set of bias-driven edits, we
took advantage of the comments that editors can
associate with a revision—typically short and brief
sentences describing the reason behind the revision. We considered as bias-driven edits those that
appeared in a revision whose comment mentioned
(N)POV, e.g., Attempts at presenting some claims
in more NPOV way; or merging in a passage
from the researchers article after basic NPOVing. We only kept edits whose before and after forms contained ﬁve or fewer words, and discarded those that only added a hyperlink or that
involved a minimal change (character-based Levenshtein distance < 4). The ﬁnal number of biasdriven edits for each of the data sets is shown in
the “Edits” column of Table 1.
2.3

Linguistic Analysis

Style guides talk about biased language in a prescriptive manner, listing a few words that should
be avoided because they are ﬂattering, vague, or
endorse a particular point of view (Wikipedia,
2013a). Our focus is on analyzing actual biased text and bias-driven edits extracted from
Wikipedia.
As we suggested above, this analysis uncovered
two major classes of bias: epistemological bias
and framing bias. Table 2 shows the distribution
(from a sample of 100 edits) of the different types
and subtypes of bias presented in this section.
(A) Epistemological bias involves propositions
that are either commonly agreed to be true or commonly agreed to be false and that are subtly presupposed, entailed, asserted or hedged in the text.
1. Factive verbs (Kiparsky and Kiparsky, 1970)
presuppose the truth of their complement
clause. In (3-a) and (4-a), realize and reveal presuppose the truth of “the oppression
of black people...” and “the Meditation technique produces...”, whereas (3-b) and (4-b)
present the two propositions as somebody’s
stand or an experimental result.
(3) a. He realized that the oppression of black people was more of a result of economic exploitation than anything innately racist.
b. His stand was that the oppression of black
people was more of a result of economic exploitation than anything innately racist.

(4) a. The ﬁrst research revealed that the Meditation
technique produces a unique state fact.
b. The ﬁrst research indicated that the Meditation technique produces a unique state fact.

Bias

Subtype

A. Epistemological bias

%
43

- Factive verbs
- Entailments
- Assertives
- Hedges
B. Framing bias

3
25
11
4
57

- Intensiﬁers
- One-sided terms

19
38

Table 2: Proportion of the different bias types.
2. Entailments are directional relations that
hold whenever the truth of one word or
phrase follows from another, e.g., murder entails kill because there cannot be murdering
without killing (5). However, murder entails killing in an unlawful, premeditated way.
This class includes implicative verbs (Karttunen, 1971), which imply the truth or untruth of their complement, depending on the
polarity of the main predicate. In (6-a), coerced into accepting entails accepting in an
unwilling way.
(5) a. After he murdered three policemen, the
colony proclaimed Kelly a wanted outlaw.
b. After he killed three policemen, the colony
proclaimed Kelly a wanted outlaw.

(6) a. A computer engineer who was coerced into
accepting a plea bargain.
b. A computer engineer who accepted a plea bargain.

3. Assertive verbs (Hooper, 1975) are those
whose complement clauses assert a proposition. The truth of the proposition is not presupposed, but its level of certainty depends
on the asserting verb. Whereas verbs of saying like say and state are usually neutral,
point out and claim cast doubt on the certainty of the proposition.
(7) a. The “no Boeing” theory is a controversial issue, even among conspiracists, many of whom
have pointed out that it is disproved by ...
b. The “no Boeing” theory is a controversial issue, even among conspiracists, many of whom
have said that it is disproved by...

(8) a. Cooper says that slavery was worse in South
America and the US than Canada, but clearly
states that it was a horrible and cruel practice.
b. Cooper says that slavery was worse in South
America and the US than Canada, but points
out that it was a horrible and cruel practice.

4. Hedges are used to reduce one’s commitment to the truth of a proposition, thus
avoiding any bold predictions (9-b) or statements (10-a).6

(13) a. Israeli forces liberated the eastern half of

(9) a. Eliminating the proﬁt motive will decrease the

eas of political activity have consisted of opposition to gay causes, pro-life law...
b. Concerned Women for America’s major areas of political activity have consisted of opposition to gay causes, anti-abortion law...

Jerusalem.
b. Israeli forces captured the eastern half of
Jerusalem.

(14) a. Concerned Women for America’s major ar-

rate of medical innovation.
b. Eliminating the proﬁt motive may have a
lower rate of medical innovation.

(10) a. The lower cost of living in more rural areas

(15) a. Colombian terrorist groups.

means a possibly higher standard of living.
b. The lower cost of living in more rural areas
means a higher standard of living.

Epistemological bias is bidirectional, that is,
bias can occur because doubt is cast on a proposition commonly assumed to be true, or because
a presupposition or implication is made about a
proposition commonly assumed to be false. For
example, in (7) and (8) above, point out is replaced
in the former case, but inserted in the second case.
If the truth of the proposition is uncontroversially
accepted by the community (i.e., reliable sources,
etc.), then the use of a factive is unbiased. In contrast, if only a speciﬁc viewpoint agrees with its
truth, then using a factive is biased.
(B) Framing bias is usually more explicit than
epistemological bias because it occurs when subjective or one-sided words are used, revealing the
author’s stance in a particular debate (Entman,
2007).
1. Subjective intensiﬁers are adjectives or adverbs that add (subjective) force to the meaning of a phrase or proposition.
(11) a. Schnabel himself did the fantastic reproductions of Basquiat’s work.
b. Schnabel himself did the accurate reproductions of Basquiat’s work.

(12) a. Shwekey’s albums are arranged by many talented arrangers.
b. Shwekey’s albums are arranged by many different arrangers.

2. One-sided terms reﬂect only one of the sides
of a contentious issue. They often belong
to controversial subjects (e.g., religion, terrorism, etc.) where the same event can be
seen from two or more opposing perspectives, like the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict (Lin
et al., 2006).
6
See Choi et al. (2012) for an exploration of the interface
between hedging and framing.

b. Colombian paramilitary groups.

Framing bias has been studied within the literature on stance recognition and arguing subjectivity. Because this literature has focused on identifying which side an article takes on a two-sided
debate such as the Israeli-Palestinian conﬂict (Lin
et al., 2006), most studies cast the problem as a
two-way classiﬁcation of documents or sentences
into for/positive vs. against/negative (Anand et
al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012; Somasundaran and
Wiebe, 2010), or into one of two opposing views
(Yano et al., 2010; Park et al., 2011). The features used by these models include subjectivity
and sentiment lexicons, counts of unigrams and
bigrams, distributional similarity, discourse relationships, and so on.
The datasets used by these studies come from
genres that overtly take a speciﬁc stance (e.g.,
debates, editorials, blog posts). In contrast,
Wikipedia editors are asked not to advocate a particular point of view, but to provide a balanced account of the different available perspectives. For
this reason, overtly biased opinion statements such
as “I believe that...” are not common in Wikipedia.
The features used by the subjectivity literature
help us detect framing bias, but we also need features that capture epistemological bias expressed
through presuppositions and entailments.

3

Automatically Identifying Biased
Language

We now show how the bias cues identiﬁed in Section 2.3 can help solve a new task. Given a biased
sentence (e.g., a sentence that a Wikipedia editor
has tagged as violating the NPOV policy), our goal
in this new task is to identify the word that introduces bias. This is part of a potential three-step
process for detecting and correcting biased language: (1) ﬁnding biased phrases, (2) identifying
the word that introduces the bias, (3) rewording to
eliminate the bias. As we will see below, it can be

hard even for humans to track down the sources of
bias, because biases in reference works are often
subtle and implicit. An automatic bias detector
that can highlight the bias-inducing word(s) and
draw the editors’ attention to words that need to
be modiﬁed could thus be important for improving
reference works like Wikipedia or even in news reporting.
We selected the subset of sentences that had a
single NPOV edit involving one (original) word.
(Although the before form consists of only one
word, the after form can be either one or more
words or the null string (i.e., deletion edits); we do
not use the after string in this identiﬁcation task).
The number of sentences in the train, dev and test
sets is shown in the last column of Table 1.
We trained a logistic regression model on a
feature vector for every word that appears in the
NPOV sentences from the training set, with the
bias-inducing words as the positive class, and all
the other words as the negative class. The features
are described in the next section.
At test time, the model is given a set of sentences and, for each of them, it ranks the words according to their probability to be biased, and outputs the highest ranked word (T OP 1 model), the
two highest ranked words (T OP 2 model), or the
three highest ranked words (T OP 3 model).
3.1

Features

The types of features used in the logistic regression model are listed in Table 3, together with
their value space. The total number of features is
36,787. The ones targeting framing bias draw on
previous work on sentiment and subjectivity detection (Wiebe et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2005). Features to capture epistemological bias are based on
the bias cues identiﬁed in Section 2.3.
A major split separates the features that describe the word under analysis (e.g., lemma, POS,
whether it is a hedge, etc.) from those that describe its surrounding context (e.g., the POS of the
word to the left, whether there is a hedge in the
context, etc.). We deﬁne context as a 5-gram window, i.e., two words to the left of the word under analysis, and two to the right. Taking context into account is important given that biases can
be context-dependent, especially epistemological
bias since it depends on the truth of a proposition.
To deﬁne some of the features like POS and grammatical relation, we used the Stanford’s CoreNLP

tagger and dependency parser (de Marneffe et al.,
2006).
Features 9–10 use the list of hedges from Hyland (2005), features 11–14 use the factives and
assertives from Hooper (1975), features 15–16
use the implicatives from Karttunen (1971), features 19–20 use the entailments from Berant et
al. (2012), features 21–25 employ the subjectivity lexicon from Riloff and Wiebe (2003), and features 26–29 use the sentiment lexicon—positive
and negative words—from Liu et al. (2005). If the
word (or a word in the context) is in the lexicon,
then the feature is true, otherwise it is false.
We also included a “bias lexicon” (feature 31)
that we built based on our NPOV corpus from
Wikipedia. We used the training set to extract the
lemmas of words that were the before form of at
least two NPOV edits, and that occurred in at least
two different articles. Of the 654 words included
in this lexicon, 433 were unique to this lexicon
(i.e., recorded in neither Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003)
subjectivity lexicon nor Liu et al.’s (2005) sentiment lexicon) and represented many one-sided or
controversial terms, e.g., abortion, same-sex, execute.
Finally, we also included a “collaborative feature” that, based on the previous revisions of the
edit’s article, computes the ratio between the number of times that the word was NPOV-edited and
its frequency of occurrence. This feature was designed to capture framing bias speciﬁc to an article
or topic.
3.2

Baselines

Previous work on subjectivity and stance recognition has been evaluated on the task of classifying documents as opinionated vs. factual, for vs.
against, positive vs. negative. Given that the task
of identifying the bias-inducing word of a sentence
is novel, there were no previous results to compare
directly against. We ran the following ﬁve baselines.
1. Random guessing. Naively returns a random
word from every sentence.
2. Role baseline. Selects the word with the
syntactic role that has the highest probability to be biased, as computed on the training set. This is the parse tree root (probability p = .126 to be biased), followed by
verbal arguments (p = .085), and the subject
(p = .084).

ID

Feature

Value

Description

1*
2
3*
4*
5
6*
7
8
9
10*
11*
12*
13*
14*
15
16*
17*
18
19*
20*
21*

Word
Lemma
POS
POS – 1
POS – 2
POS + 1
POS + 2
Position in sentence
Hedge
Hedge in context
Factive verb
Factive verb in context
Assertive verb
Assertive verb in context
Implicative verb
Implicative verb in context
Report verb
Report verb in context
Entailment
Entailment in context
Strong subjective

<string>
<string>
{NNP, JJ, ...}
{NNP, JJ, ...}
{NNP, JJ, ...}
{NNP, JJ, ...}
{NNP, JJ, ...}
{start, mid, end}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}

22

Strong subjective in context

{true, false}

23*

Weak subjective

{true, false}

24*

Weak subjective in context

{true, false}

25

Polarity

{+, –, both, ...}

26*
27*
28*
29*
30*
31
32*

Positive word
Positive word in context
Negative word
Negative word in context
Grammatical relation
Bias lexicon
Collaborative feature

{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{true, false}
{root, subj, ...}
{true, false}
<numeric>

Word w under analysis.
Lemma of w.
POS of w.
POS of one word before w.
POS of two words before w.
POS of one word after w.
POS of two words after w.
Position of w in the sentence (split into three parts).
w is in Hyland’s (2005) list of hedges (e.g., apparently).
One/two words) around w is a hedge (Hyland, 2005).
w is in Hooper’s (1975) list of factives (e.g., realize).
One/two word(s) around w is a factive (Hooper, 1975).
w is in Hooper’s (1975) list of assertives (e.g., claim).
One/two word(s) around w is an assertive (Hooper, 1975).
w is in Karttunen’s (1971) list of implicatives (e.g., manage).
One/two word(s) around w is an implicative (Karttunen, 1971).
w is a report verb (e.g., add).
One/two word(s) around w is a report verb.
w is in Berant et al.’s (2012) list of entailments (e.g., kill).
One/two word(s) around w is an entailment (Berant et al., 2012).
w is in Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) list of strong subjectives (e.g.,
absolute).
One/two word(s) around w is a strong subjective (Riloff and
Wiebe, 2003).
w is in Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) list of weak subjectives (e.g.,
noisy).
One/two word(s) around w is a weak subjective (Riloff and
Wiebe, 2003).
The polarity of w according to Riloff and Wiebe (2003), e.g.,
praising is positive.
w is in Liu et al.’s (2005) list of positive words (e.g., excel).
One/two word(s) around w is positive (Liu et al., 2005).
w is in Liu et al.’s (2005) list of negative words (e.g., terrible).
One/two word(s) around w is negative (Liu et al., 2005).
Whether w is the subject, object, root, etc. of its sentence.
w has been observed in NPOV edits (e.g., nationalist).
Number of times that w was NPOV-edited in the article’s prior
history / frequency of w.

Table 3: Features used by the bias detector. The star (*) shows the most contributing features.
3. Sentiment baseline. Logistic regression
model that only uses the features based on
Liu et al.’s (2005) lexicons of positive and
negative words (i.e., features 26–29).

3.3

Results and Discussion

To measure performance, we used accuracy deﬁned as:
Number of sentences with the correctly predicted biased word

4. Subjectivity baseline. Logistic regression
model that only uses the features based on
Riloff and Wiebe’s (2003) lexicon of subjective words (i.e., features 21–25).
5. Wikipedia baseline. Selects as biased the
words that appear in Wikipedia’s list of words
to avoid (Wikipedia, 2013a).
These baselines assessed the difﬁculty of the
task, as well as the extent to which traditional
sentiment-analysis and subjectivity features would
sufﬁce to detect biased language.

Total number of sentences

The results are shown in Table 4. As explained
earlier, we evaluated all the models by outputting
as biased either the highest ranked word or the
two or three highest ranked words. These correspond to the T OP 1, T OP 2 and T OP 3 columns, respectively. The T OP 3 score increases to 59%. A
tool that highlights up to three words to be revised
would simplify the editors’ job and decrease signiﬁcantly the time required to revise.
Our model outperforms all ﬁve baselines by a
large margin, showing the importance of considering a wide range of features. Wikipedia’s list
of words to avoid falls very short on recall. Fea-

System

T OP 1

T OP 2

T OP 3

Baseline 1: Random
Baseline 2: Role
Baseline 3: Sentiment
Baseline 4: Subjectivity
Baseline 5: Wikipedia
Our system
Humans (AMT)

2.18
15.65
14.78
16.52
10.00
34.35
37.39

7.83
20.43
22.61
25.22
10.00
46.52
50.00

9.13
25.65
27.83
33.91
10.00
58.70
59.13

Table 4: Accuracy (%) of the bias detector on the
test set.
tures that contribute the most to the model’s performance (in a feature ablation study on the dev
set) are highlighted with a star (*) in Table 3. In
addition to showing the importance of linguistic
cues for different classes of bias, the ablation study
highlights the role of contextual features. The bias
lexicon does not seem to help much, suggesting
that it is overﬁt to the training data.
An error analysis shows that our system makes
acceptable errors in that words wrongly predicted
as bias-inducing may well introduce bias in a different context. In (16), the system picked eschew,
whereas orthodox would have been the correct
choice according to the gold edit. Note that both
the sentiment and the subjectivity lexicons list eschew as a negative word. The bias type that poses
the greatest challenge to the system are terms that
are one-sided or loaded in a particular topic, such
as orthodox in this example.
(16) a. Some Christians eschew orthodox theology; such
as the Unitarians, Socinian, [...]
b. Some Christians eschew mainstream trinitarian
theology; such as the Unitarians, Socinian, [...]

The last row in Table 4 lists the performance
of humans on the same task, presented in the next
section.

4

Human Perception of Biased Language

Is it difﬁcult for humans to ﬁnd the word in a
sentence that induces bias, given the subtle, often implicit biases in Wikipedia. We used Amazon Mechanical Turk7 (AMT) to elicit annotations
from humans for the same 230 sentences from the
test set that we used to evaluate the bias detector
in Section 3.3. The goal of this annotation was
twofold: to compare the performance of our bias
detector against a human baseline, and to assess
the difﬁculty of this task for humans. While AMT
labelers are not trained Wikipedia editors, under7

http://www.mturk.com

standing how difﬁcult these cases are for untrained
labelers is an important baseline.
4.1

Task

Our HIT (Human Intelligence Task) was called
“Find the biased word!”. We kept the task description succinct. Turkers were shown Wikipedia’s
deﬁnition of a “biased statement” and two example sentences that illustrated the two types of bias,
framing and epistemological. In each HIT, annotators saw 10 sentences, one after another, and each
one followed by a text box entitled “Word introducing bias.” For each sentence, they were asked
to type in the text box the word that caused the
statement to be biased. They were only allowed to
enter a single word.
Before the 10 sentences, turkers were asked to
list the languages they spoke as well as their primary language in primary school. This was English in all the cases. In addition, we included a
probe question in the form of a paraphrasing task:
annotators were given a sentence and two paraphrases (a correct and a bad one) to choose from.
The goal of this probe question was to discard
annotators who were not paying attention or did
not have a sufﬁcient command of English. This
simple test was shown to be effective in verifying
and eliciting linguistic attentiveness (Munro et al.,
2010). This was especially important in our case
as we were interested in using the human annotations as an oracle. At the end of the task, participants were given the option to provide additional
feedback.
We split the 230 sentences into 23 sets of 10
sentences, and asked for 10 annotations of each
set. Each approved HIT was rewarded with $0.30.
4.2

Results and Discussion

On average, it took turkers about four minutes to
complete each HIT. The feedback that we got from
some of them conﬁrmed our hypothesis that ﬁnding the bias source is difﬁcult: “Some of the ‘biases’ seemed very slight if existent at all,” “This
was a lot harder than I thought it would be... Interesting though!”.
We postprocessed the answers ignoring case,
punctuation signs, and spelling errors. To ensure
an answer quality as high as possible, we only
kept those turkers who answered attentively by applying two ﬁlters: we only accepted answers that
matched a valid word from the sentence, and we
discarded answers from participants who did not

30
20

5

Related Work

0

10

Number of sentences

40

50

a speciﬁc topic. They also picked eschew for (16)
instead of orthodox. Compared to the system, they
do better in detecting bias-inducing intensiﬁers,
and about the same with epistemological bias.

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Number of times the top word was selected

Figure 1: Distribution of the number of turkers
who selected the top word (i.e., the word selected
by the majority of turkers).
pass the paraphrasing task—there were six such
cases. These ﬁlters provided us with conﬁdence in
the turkers’ answers as a fair standard of comparison.
Overall, humans correctly identiﬁed the biased
word 30% of the time. For each sentence, we
ranked the words according to the number of turkers (out of 10) who selected them and, like we
did for the automated system, we assessed performance when considering only the top word
(T OP 1), the top 2 words (T OP 2), and the top 3
words (T OP 3). The last row of Table 4 reports the
results. Only 37.39% of the majority answers coincided with the gold label, slightly higher than
our system’s accuracy. The fact that the human
answers are very close to the results of our system
reﬂects the difﬁculty of the task. Biases in reference works can be very subtle and go unnoticed
by humans; automated systems could thus be extremely helpful.
As a measure of inter-rater reliability, we computed pairwise agreement. The turkers agreed
40.73% of the time, compared to the 5.1% chance
agreement that would be achieved if raters had
randomly selected a word for each sentence. Figure 1 plots the number of times the top word of
each sentence was selected. The bulk of the sentences only obtained between four and six answers
for the same word.
There is a good amount of overlap (∼34%) between the correct answers predicted by our system
and those from humans. Much like the automated
system, humans also have the hardest time identifying words that are one-sided or controversial to

The work in this paper builds upon prior work on
subjectivity detection (Wiebe et al., 2004; Lin et
al., 2011; Conrad et al., 2012) and stance recognition (Yano et al., 2010; Somasundaran and Wiebe,
2010; Park et al., 2011), but applied to the genre
of reference works such as Wikipedia. Unlike the
blogs, online debates and opinion pieces which
have been the major focus of previous work, bias
in reference works is undesirable. As a result,
the expression of bias is more implicit, making it
harder to detect by both computers and humans.
Of the two classes of bias that we uncover, framing bias is indeed strongly linked to subjectivity, but epistemological bias is not. In this respect, our research is comparable to Greene and
Resnik’s (2009) work on identifying implicit sentiment or perspective in journalistic texts, based on
semantico-syntactic choices.
Given that the data that we use is not supposed
to be opinionated, our task consists in detecting
(implicit) bias instead of classifying into side A
or B documents about a controversial topic like
ObamaCare (Conrad et al., 2012) or the IsraeliPalestinian conﬂict (Lin et al., 2006; Greene and
Resnik, 2009). Our model detects whether all
the relevant perspectives are fairly represented by
identifying statements that are one-sided. To this
end, the features based on subjectivity and sentiment lexicons turn out to be helpful, and incorporating more features for stance detection is an
important direction for future work.
Other aspects of Wikipedia structure have been
used for other NLP applications. The Wikipedia
revision history has been used for spelling correction, text summarization (Nelken and Yamangil,
2008), lexical simpliﬁcation (Yatskar et al., 2010),
paraphrasing (Max and Wisniewski, 2010), and
textual entailment (Zanzotto and Pennacchiotti,
2010). Ganter and Strube (2009) have used
Wikipedia’s weasel-word tags to train a hedge detector. Callahan and Herring (2011) have examined cultural bias based on Wikipedia’s NPOV
policy.

6

Conclusions

Our study of bias in Wikipedia has implications
for linguistic theory and computational linguistics. We show that bias in reference works falls
broadly into two classes, framing and epistemological. The cues to framing bias are more explicit and are linked to the literature on subjectivity; cues to epistemological bias are subtle and
implicit, linked to presuppositions and entailments
in the text. Epistemological bias has not received
much attention since it does not play a major role
in overtly opinionated texts, the focus of much research on stance recognition. However, our logistic regression model reveals that epistemological
and other features can usefully augment the traditional sentiment and subjectivity features for addressing the difﬁcult task of identifying the biasinducing word in a biased sentence.
Identifying the bias-inducing word is a challenging task even for humans. Our linguisticallyinformed model performs nearly as well as humans tested on the same task. Given the subtlety of some of these biases, an automated system that highlights one or more potentially biased
words would provide a helpful tool for editors of
reference works and news reports, not only making them aware of unnoticed biases but also saving them hours of time. Future work could investigate the incorporation of syntactic features or
further features from the stance detection literature. Features from the literature on veridicality
(de Marneffe et al., 2012) could be informative of
the writer’s commitment to the truth of the events
described, and document-level features could help
assess the extent to which the article provides a
balanced account of all the facts and points of
view.
Finally, the NPOV corpus and the bias lexicon
that we release as part of this research could prove
useful in other bias related tasks.

Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate the support of Jean Wu in
running our task on Amazon Mechanical Turk,
and all the Amazon Turkers who participated. We
beneﬁted from comments by Valentin Spitkovsky
on a previous draft and from the helpful suggestions of the anonymous reviewers. The ﬁrst author
was supported by a Beatriu de Pin´ s postdoctoral
o
scholarship (2010 BP-A 00149) from Generalitat
de Catalunya. The second author was supported

by NSF IIS-1016909. The last author was supported by the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences at Stanford.

References
Pranav Anand, Marilyn Walker, Rob Abbott, Jean
E. Fox Tree, Robeson Bowmani, and Michael Minor. 2011. Cats rule and dogs drool!: Classifying
stance in online debate. In Proceedings of ACLHLT 2011 Workshop on Computational Approaches
to Subjectivity and Sentiment Analysis, pages 1–9.
Jonathan Berant, Ido Dagan, Meni Adler, and Jacob
Goldberger. 2012. Efﬁcient tree-based approximation for entailment graph learning. In Proceedings
of ACL 2012, pages 117–125.
Ewa Callahan and Susan C. Herring. 2011. Cultural bias in Wikipedia articles about famous persons. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(10):1899–1915.
Eunsol Choi, Chenhao Tan, Lillian Lee, Cristian
Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and Jennifer Spindel.
2012. Hedge detection as a lens on framing in the
GMO debates: a position paper. In Proceedings
of the ACL-2012 Workshop on Extra-Propositional
Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics,
pages 70–79.
Alexander Conrad, Janyce Wiebe, and Rebecca Hwa.
2012. Recognizing arguing subjectivity and argument tags. In Proceedings of ACL-2012 Workshop
on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning in Computational Linguistics, pages 80–88.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Bill MacCartney, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Generating typed
dependency parses from phrase structure parses. In
Proceedings of LREC 2006.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Christopher D. Manning, and Christopher Potts. 2012. Did it happen? The pragmatic complexity of veridicality assessment. Computational Linguistics, 38(2):301–
333.
Robert M. Entman. 2007. Framing bias: Media in the
distribution of power. Journal of Communication,
57(1):163–173.
Viola Ganter and Michael Strube. 2009. Finding
hedges by chasing weasels: Hedge detection using
Wikipedia tags and shallow linguistic features. In
Proceedings of ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 173–176.
Stephan Greene and Philip Resnik. 2009. More than
words: Syntactic packaging and implicit sentiment.
In Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2009, pages 503–
511.
Joan B. Hooper. 1975. On assertive predicates. In
J. Kimball, editor, Syntax and Semantics, volume 4,
pages 91–124. Academic Press, New York.

Ken Hyland. 2005. Metadiscourse: Exploring Interaction in Writing. Continuum, London and New York.
Lauri Karttunen. 1971. Implicative verbs. Language,
47(2):340–358.
Paul Kiparsky and Carol Kiparsky. 1970. Fact. In
M. Bierwisch and K. E. Heidolph, editors, Progress
in Linguistics, pages 143–173. Mouton, The Hague.
Wei-Hao Lin, Theresa Wilson, Janyce Wiebe, and
Alexander Hauptmann. 2006. Which side are you
on? Identifying perspectives at the document and
sentence levels. In Proceedings of CoNLL 2006,
pages 109–116.
Chenghua Lin, Yulan He, and Richard Everson.
2011.
Sentence subjectivity detection with
weakly-supervised learning. In Proceedings of
AFNLP 2011, pages 1153–1161.
Bing Liu, Minqing Hu, and Junsheng Cheng. 2005.
Opinion Observer: analyzing and comparing opinions on the Web. In Proceedings of WWW 2005,
pages 342–351.
Aur´ lien Max and Guillaume Wisniewski. 2010. Mine
ing naturally-occurring corrections and paraphrases
from Wikipedia’s revision history. In Proceedings
of LREC 2010, pages 3143–3148.
Robert Munro, Steven Bethard, Victor Kuperman,
Vicky Tzuyin Lai, Robin Melnick, Christopher
Potts, Tyler Schnoebelen, and Harry Tily. 2010.
Crowdsourcing and language studies: the new generation of linguistic data. In Proceedings of the
NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech
and Language Data With Amazons Mechanical
Turk, pages 122–130.
Rani Nelken and Elif Yamangil. 2008. Mining
Wikipedias article revision history for training Computational Linguistics algorithms. In Proceedings of
the 1st AAAI Workshop on Wikipedia and Artiﬁcial
Intelligence.
Souneil Park, KyungSoon Lee, and Junehwa Song.
2011. Contrasting opposing views of news articles
on contentious issues. In Proceedings of ACL 2011,
pages 340–349.
Ellen Riloff and Janyce Wiebe. 2003. Learning extraction patterns for subjective expressions. In Proceedings of EMNLP 2003, pages 105–112.
Swapna Somasundaran and Janyce Wiebe. 2010. Recognizing stances in ideological on-line debates. In
Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010 Workshop on
Computational Approaches to Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, pages 116–124.
Peter D. Turney. 2002. Thumbs up or thumbs down?
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classiﬁcation of reviews. In Proceedings of ACL 2002,
pages 417–424.

Janyce Wiebe, Theresa Wilson, Rebecca Bruce,
Matthew Bell, and Melanie Martin. 2004. Learning subjective language. Computational Linguistics,
30(3):277–308.
Wikipedia. 2013a. Wikipedia: Manual of style / Words
to watch.
http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Wikipedia:Words_to_avoid. [Retrieved February 5, 2013].
Wikipedia. 2013b. Wikipedia: Neutral point of view.
http:http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Neutral_point_of_view.
[Retrieved February 5, 2013].
Tae Yano, Philip Resnik, and Noah A. Smith. 2010.
Shedding (a thousand points of) light on biased language. In Proceedings of the NAACL-HLT 2010
Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data
With Amazons Mechanical Turk, pages 152–158.
Mark Yatskar, Bo Pang, Cristian Danescu-NiculescuMizil, and Lillian Lee. 2010. For the sake of simplicity: Unsupervised extraction of lexical simpliﬁcations from Wikipedia. In Proceedings of NAACLHLT 2010, pages 365–368.
Fabio M. Zanzotto and Marco Pennacchiotti. 2010.
Expanding textual entailment corpora from
Wikipedia using co-training. In Proceedings of
the 2nd Coling Workshop on The People’s Web
Meets NLP: Collaboratively Constructed Semantic
Resources, pages 28–36.

