Limitations of MLLR Adaptation with Spanish-Accented English:
An Error Analysis
Constance Clarke1,2 and Dan Jurafsky2
1

Department of Psychology, University at Buffalo SUNY, Buffalo, NY, USA
2
Department of Linguistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
cclarke2@buffalo.edu, jurafsky@stanford.edu

ABSTRACT

2. SPANISH-ACCENTED CORPUS

We studied the effect of MLLR adaptation with Spanishaccented English to understand the strengths and weaknesses
of MLLR with unseen foreign accents. We trained a global
MLLR transform on 10 adaptation sentences per speaker,
giving a 3.4% absolute decrease in phone error rate. We then
studied the pattern of improvements across phones and phone
classes. Phones that improved the least tended to be those that
do not exist in Spanish. Results suggest the poorer performance
is related to increased insertion and substituter rates during the
adaptation phase, as well as greater acoustic variability.
Index Terms: speech recognition, adaptation, MLLR, foreign
accent, Spanish, error analysis

We used a subset of the conversational Spanish-accented
English corpus collected at Johns Hopkins University [1] that
included 16 speakers (8 males, 8 females) from several
Spanish-speaking countries. The speakers represented a wide
variety of English proficiencies. In the corpus, pairs of
speakers performed collaborative tasks over the telephone, and
the speech was recorded simultaneously in telephone- and
wide-band formats. The present study used the wide-band
speech. Speech was segmented into turns and transcribed, with
a mean of a little over one hour per speaker.

1. INTRODUCTION
Non-native speech is well-known for reducing speech
recognition performance. It can result in word error rates of
two to three times native error rates [1, 2]. Accent-specific
acoustic models can improve performance, but are often
infeasible in practice due to data collection limitations and an
intractable/unknown number of potential accents.
An alternative approach is to adapt native acoustic models
to non-native speech on-line during recognition. Maximum
likelihood linear regression (MLLR) [3] is an adaptation
technique that uses small amounts of data to train a linear
transform which warps the Gaussian means so as to maximize
the likelihood of the data. MLLR has produced substantial
gains in non-native recognition accuracy for a variety of
accents, including Spanish (7% absolute) [1], Cantonese (10%)
[4], Japanese (over 20%) [5], and German (5%) [6]. Despite
these gains, however, typical non-native accuracy following
adaptation still falls substantially below that of native speech
[1, 2, 4, 5, 6]. An important step in improving an adaptation
technique is understanding its limitations. What aspects of
accented speech are adaptation methods not capturing?
To begin to address this question, we performed a phonebased error analysis on the recognition results for Spanishaccented speech before and after MLLR speaker adaptation.
Our goal was to determine which phones or phone classes
improved the most or least with MLLR. We chose to use
MLLR with a global transform because of its effectiveness
with adaptation set sizes on the order of 10s of utterances. This
time frame is ideal for the goal of rapid adaptation to a speaker
with an unknown accent.

3. ERROR ANALYSIS
In this study, we performed phone-recognition tests on the
Spanish-accented corpus, first with native English acoustic
models, and then after adapting the models with 10 utterances
per speaker. We then conducted a linguistically-based analysis
of the improvement in phone recognition error rate of various
phone classes. We used phone recognition, rather than word
recognition, in order to more directly assess the acoustic model
fits and avoid the masking effects of lexical and language
model constraints. We also conducted word recognition on the
entire Spanish-accented data set in order to obtain a word error
rate (WER) benchmark for comparison with other studies.

3.1 Recognition system
To conduct the recognition experiments, we used the SONIC
large vocabulary recognizer [7]. We used only the first pass of
the decoder, which consists of a time-synchronous beampruned Viterbi token-passing search. Crossword acoustic
models and a 3-gram language model were applied in this pass.
Acoustic models: We used gender-dependent acoustic
models (AMs) from the SONIC release, pre-trained with 30
hours of data (283 speakers) from the WSJ0 and WSJ1 corpora
of WSJ text read by native speakers of American English. The
models were context-dependent state-tied triphones.
Lexicons: For word recognition, we used the 39,000-word
Mississippi State ISIP Switchboard lexicon as augmented for
the Spanish-accented data set by [8] and [9]. For phone
recognition, we created a phone lexicon in which each phone
was a “word” with itself as the pronunciation.
Language models: For both word and phone recognition,
we used cheating language models (LMs) based on the entire
data set. This allowed for a reasonable level of performance

despite the task and accent mismatch between the data and
acoustic models.
To create the phone LM, we replaced each word in the
transcriptions with its pronunciation from the lexicon described
above, and used the CMU-Cambridge Toolkit [10] to build 3gram Katz back-off LMs with Witten-Bell discounting. The
word LM had a vocabulary of 4133 words, and the phone LM
had 55 “words”: 50 phones (from a modified SPHINX version
of the ARPAbet) plus symbols for silence and non-speech.
Word-recognition evaluation: The entire data set was used
for the word-recognition test, a total of 5,530 (test) utterances
and 144,539 (test) words. The recognizer used the native
English AMs and the full word lexicon and LM described
above. The mean WER for males was 64.4% (61.0% to
67.1%). The mean WER for females was 61.4% (43.7% to
83.1%). WER correlated strongly with English proficiency
scores (r = -0.78, p < .001; scores are on a scale from 2 to 8,
with higher scores signifying higher proficiency [1, 11]). These
error rates are comparable to those of other accented speech
studies [1, 4, 5, 6, 8].

3.2 Phone recognition and adaptation methodology
For our main experiment, we decoded the Spanish-accented
speech using the phone-recognizer with the native English
AMs and holding out 10 utterances per speaker for adaptation.
This produced the baseline phone error rates (PERs). We then
evaluated the data again following MLLR speaker adaptation.
To select the adaptation utterances, we selected all
utterances with durations between 8 and 13 seconds. From
these we then selected by hand the first 10 for each speaker
that contained at least 50% speech. We chose to use 10 based
on pilot tests showing little additional improvement with more
than 10 utterances using a global transform.
MLLR adaptation was implemented in an unsupervised
fashion with a global transform. Although evaluation of the full
test set used phone recognition for the purpose of phone-based
error analysis, recognition of the adaptation utterances during

MLLR used word recognition because this is what is typically
used. For each speaker, 10 adaptation utterances were first
decoded with native English AMs, and the alignment output
was used to adapt the AMs. Each subsequent iteration used the
newly adapted models to re-recognize the adaptation data.
After three iterations, phone recognition was performed on the
speaker’s test data (minus the adaptation data) using the
adapted AMs.
The mean baseline PERs were 66.9% for male speakers
and 59.4% for females. Post-adaptation PERs were 63.4% for
males and 56.1% for females.

3.3 Error analysis results
We first evaluated the recognition performance for each phone.
Phone-level reference transcriptions were created by replacing
each word in the word transcriptions with its pronunciation in
the lexicon. Sclite v2.3 was used to align the reference and
hypothesis, and rates of correct identification, substitution,
deletion, and insertion were calculated for each phone.
Figure 1 shows the absolute improvement in PER for each
phone from baseline to post-adaptation, grouped by manner
class. Two characteristics stand out. First, phones vary widely
in the amount of improvement, with some benefiting by over
8% and others getting worse. In addition, /r/-variants benefited
greatly from adaptation: ER, AXR, and R gained by 13.26%,
8.64%, and 6.00%, respectively.
Improvement in PER (post-MLLR – baseline) did not
correlate significantly with the proportion of each phone in the
adaptation materials (r = 0.18, ns), with the baseline PER (r
=0.09, ns), or with PER in the adaptation utterances (r = 0.10,
ns). These results were unexpected; more instances of a phone
in the adaptation materials should result in better representation
of that phone’s acoustic characteristics in the global transform.
Yet the correlation was actually in the opposite direction. A
similar argument could be made for baseline PER.

Figure 1: Improvement in phone error rate following MLLR speaker-adaptation with 10 utterances. Means represent 16
Spanish-accented speakers. (Note: stop-D, e.g., PD, represents syllable-final unreleased stop consonants.)

We grouped phones into linguistic classes to investigate
how MLLR adaptation captures traditional linguistic features.
Table 1 shows the baseline PER and percent improvement
following adaptation for each phone class examined. To
determine whether differences were statistically reliable, we
entered percent improvement for each phone contrast into a
separate analysis of variance (ANOVA) with phone class and
gender as factors, and speaker as a random effect. Consonants
improved more than vowels, F(1, 14) = 18.54, p < .005, and
tense vowels improved more than lax vowels, F(1, 14) = 23.26,
p < .001. There was a main effect of class for the Manner
contrasts, F(2.5, 34.7) = 3.18, p < .05 (Huynh-Feldt corrected
for nonsphericity), and for the Place contrasts, F(7, 98) =
14.89, p < .001. There was no effect of Voicing, and no main
effects or interactions involving gender for any analysis.
Table 1: Baseline phone error rate and percent change
after adaptation (post-MLLR PER – baseline PER)
Contrast
Consonants vs. Vowels†
consonant
vowel
Manner*
approximant
fricative/affricate
nasal
stop
vowel
Voicing (Cs only)
voiced
voiceless
Place of articulation (Cs only)†
labial
labiodental
dental
alveolar
postalveolar
palatal
velar
glottal
Tenseness (Vs only)†
tense
lax

†

Baseline
Change
PER
(% absolute)
62.64
62.22

-3.52
-2.21

64.82
60.35
51.86
70.30
62.22

-4.41
-1.84
-4.14
-4.17
-2.21

63.00
61.99

-3.42
-3.69

53.92
59.08
65.43
63.52
72.36
54.57
61.65
70.32

-6.33
0.34
-0.86
-3.42
-6.42
-3.49
-4.05
3.53

55.74
67.47

-4.04
-0.72

p < .005, * p < .05, Note: All means are weighted by phone count.

An interesting trend begins to emerge in this analysis:
Phonemes that do not exist in the Spanish language seem to
improve the least with adaptation. For example, lax vowels,
which are not present in Spanish, improve by only 0.72%
absolute compared to 4.04% for tense vowels, many of which
are in the Spanish inventory. Notice also that, of the six phones
that got worse after adaptation in Fig. 1, five are not in
Spanish: V, HH, GD, IH, AX. (We classified a phone as “in
Spanish” if it maps fairly directly onto a phoneme in Spanish,
not including allophonic variants such as DH.) Based on this
observation, we split the phones into two categories, Spanish
and non-Spanish, and entered the absolute percent change from
baseline to post-MLLR into an ANOVA. As shown in Table 2,
Spanish phones improved significantly more than non-Spanish
phones, F(1, 14) = 35.43, p < .001.

Table 2: Baseline phone error rates and change after
adaptation grouped by whether phone exists in Spanish
Baseline
Change
PER (% absolute)
In
AA AXR B CH D EY F G IY
Spanish K L M N OW P R S T UW W
AE AH AO AW AX AY BD
Not In DD DH DX EH ER GD HH
Spanish IH IX JH KD NG OY PD SH
TD TH TS UH V Y Z ZH

57.86

-4.74

66.91

-1.31

Note: All means are weighted by phone count.

We explored four possible explanations of the poorer
adaptation results for non-Spanish phones. They related to:
baseline phone error rates; error patterns produced during the
decoding of adaptation utterances; variability in the realization
of non-Spanish phones, and the size of the adaptation set.
Baseline phone error rate: As is clear from Table 2, nonSpanish phones had a higher baseline PER than Spanish
phones. A possible explanation for the difference in
improvement after adaptation is that phones with higher PERs
benefit more from MLLR. However, as reported above, there
was no correlation between baseline PER and percent
improvement by phones.
Errors in decoding adaptation utterances: It is important to
examine the errors generated in the first recognition pass of the
adaptation utterances because the resulting hypotheses
determine the MLLR transform. We expected a higher
substitution rate for non-Spanish phones than for Spanish
phones because non-native speakers often replace unfamiliar
phonemes with similar sounds from their native inventory. The
substitution rate was higher for non-Spanish (29.43%) than for
Spanish (26.65%) phones; however, the correlation between
substitution rate and PER change after adaptation was actually
in the opposite direction (r = -0.27, p = .06). Therefore, the
differing improvement rates are not due to more substitutions
of non-Spanish phones during adaptation.
Two other error types significantly correlated with change
in PER: insertion rate (r = 0.48, p < .001) and substituter rate
(r = 0.33, p < .05; that is, the mean percentage of time a
particular phone was substituted for all target phones).
Specifically, phones with higher insertion or substituter rates
benefited less from adaptation. This makes sense because
inserted and substituted phones are aligned with the wrong
acoustic features. If non-Spanish phones have higher insertion
and substituter rates, this could explain the differing
improvement with adaptation; and, indeed, they do (insertion:
non-Spanish 8.41%, Spanish 6.24%; substituter: non-Spanish
3.48%, Spanish 2.49%). Why are non-Spanish phones
inappropriately recognized more often? One possibility is that,
because the word lexicon and LM were used during
unsupervised adaptation, non-Spanish phones were expected as
often as in English, but did not appear as often in the data
(because of non-native pronunciations). The decoder
“recognizes” them, due to lexical and LM constraints, but in
the wrong places. We are planning follow-up experiments to
test the assumption that non-Spanish phones in the adaptation
data actually are a poorer match with the acoustic models.
Variability in vowel production: Finally, we tested whether
non-Spanish vowels were produced with greater variability in
the test utterances. If the acoustics of these phones were highly

inconsistent, then the MLLR transform would be of little
benefit. To test this hypothesis, we hand-measured the first and
second formants (F1 and F2) of the Spanish vowels (AA EY
IY OW UW) and of the worst-performing non-Spanish vowels
(AH AX EH IH UH). Selecting tokens from the data set
involved three steps. First, we aligned the full data set with the
word transcriptions using SONIC. Second, for each speaker we
automatically selected three tokens of each vowel, one from
the first, second, and third portions of the speaker’s data set. As
a compromise between controlling phonetic environment and
finding enough tokens, we only measured vowels in alveolarvowel-alveolar environments (including T D TD DD DX N L
S Z). Third, using Praat [12], we realigned the vowel labels by
hand to begin/end halfway through the onset/offset transitions,
and calculated the mean F1 and F2 for each vowel.
Several samples were discarded due to elision or
transcription error, leaving 41 to 48 samples of each vowel.
UH was not analyzed because only six tokens were found in
the correct context. F1 and F2 standard deviations were
calculated separately across males and females and used as the
variability measure. Table 3 shows the results. There is no
clear difference in mean variability between Spanish and nonSpanish phones. However, there was a significant correlation
between F2 standard deviation and PER change for males (r =
0.71, p < .05). This finding is suggestive that phones produced
with greater variation do not benefit as much with MLLR, but
further research is needed.
Size of adaptation set: In case the Spanish/non-Spanish
effect was an artifact of the small adaptation set, we re-ran the
experiment using half of each speaker’s data as the adaptation
set (between 131 and 312 utterances), leaving the remaining
half for testing, and used 55 regression classes (one per phone)
to improve performance. Absolute improvement was 15.24%
for Spanish phones, and 9.53% for non-Spanish. Even with a
large amount of adaptation data, the effect of phone inventory
remains.
Table 3: F1 and F2 standard deviations for male (M)
and female (F) speakers and means (M) across vowels

M
F

Spanish
Non-Spanish
AA EY IY OW UW M AH AX EH IH
F1 93 69 62 75 49 70 65 87 44 52

M
62

F2 155 190 198 207 316 213 214 325 196 168 226
F1 114 97

60 102 62

87 118 126 109 68 105

F2 227 244 402 293 361 306 156 269 258 275 240

4. CONCLUSIONS
We studied the patterns of improvement in phone recognition
after MLLR adaptation for Spanish-accented English. Phones
varied widely in amount of improvement, from a 13% decrease
in PER to an almost 4% increase. Phones with degraded
performance tended to be English phones that do not exist in
Spanish (e.g., lax vowels, HH, V). Our results suggest this
effect is not due to baseline PER, frequency in the adaptation
materials, or substitution rate during adaptation. Instead, it is
associated with increased insertion and substituter rates during
the adaptation phase. We also found an effect of phonetic
variability; more variable phones were less well modeled by

MLLR (for male speakers only). Finally, English rhotic phones
(R, AXR, ER) showed particular improvement from
adaptation.
A remaining question is how supervised adaptation would
affect the results. We ran a supervised version of the
experiment with the male speakers and, surprisingly, found an
increase in PER from baseline. This may be due to a large
number of poorly transcribed word fragments and filled pauses
in the adaptation utterances (we counted a mean of 4.4 out of
10 per speaker). Further research is needed to explore this issue
as these are common in non-native speech.
The Spanish/non-Spanish effect much be checked with a
native English data set to ensure it is not an inherent
characteristic of these phone groups. This study is currently
underway. If, however, the effect is due to production patterns
of non-native phones, as we suspect, it may point to a source of
MLLR’s limitations in handling foreign accent. These findings
thus suggest that cross-language differences in phone inventory
should be an important area of focus for improvements in
foreign accent adaptation.

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by a NIH NRSA to CC and ONR MURI
N000140510388. We are grateful to W. Byrne for the corpus,
J. Yuan, C. Boulis, and J. Brenier for helpful advice and
discussion, and G. Grigoryev, C. La, and B. Lo who prepared
the data and transcription files as part of a class project.

6. REFERENCES
[1]

Byrne, W., Knodt, E., Khudanpur, S., and Bernstein, J., “Is
automatic speech recognition ready for non-native speech? A
data collection effort and initial experiments in modeling
conversational Hispanic English,” in ESCA Conference on
Speech Technology in Language Learning, 1998, pp. 37-40.
[2] Tomokiyo, L. M. and Waibel, A., “Adaptation methods for nonnative speech,” in Proceedings of Multilinguality in Spoken
Language Processing, 2001.
[3] Leggetter, C. J. and Woodland, P. C., “Maximum likelihood
linear regression for speaker adaptation of continuous density
hidden Markov models,” Computer Speech and Language, vol. 9,
pp. 171-185, 1995.
[4] Liu, W. K. and Fung, P., “MLLR-based accent model adaptation
without accented data,” in Proceedings of ICSLP, 2000, 738-741.
[5] Tomokiyo, L. M., “Lexical and acoustic modeling of non-native
speech in LVCSR,” in Proceedings of ICSLP, 2000, pp. 346-349.
[6] Wang, Z., Schultz, T., and Waibel, A., “Comparison of acoustic
model adaptation techniques on non-native speech,” in
Proceedings of IEEE ICASSP, 2003, pp. 540-543.
[7] Pellom, B. and Hacioglu, K., “Recent improvements in the CU
SONIC ASR system for noisy speech: The SPINE task,” in
Proceedings of IEEE ICASSP, 2003.
[8] Ward, W., Krech, H., Yu, X., Herold, K., Figgs, G., Ikeno, A.,
Jurafsky, D., and Byrne, W., “Lexicon adaptation for LVCSR:
Speaker idiosyncrasies, non-native speakers, and pronunciation
choice,” in Proceedings of PMLA, 2002, pp. 83-88.
[9] Grigoryev, G, La, C., and Lo, B., “ASR training for Spanishaccented English speech,” Stanford class project, 2005.
[10] Clarkson, P. R. and Rosenfeld, R., “Statistical language modeling
using the CMU-Cambridge Toolkit,” in Proceeding of ESCA
Eurospeech, 1997, pp. 2707-2710.
[11] Ordinate Corporation, “The phonepass test,” 1998.
[12] Boersma, P. and Weenink, D., “Praat (Version 4.3.27),” March
2006, http://www.praat.org.

