Robust Machine Translation Evaluation with Entailment Features∗
o
Sebastian Pad´
Stuttgart University
pado@ims.uni-stuttgart.de

Michel Galley, Dan Jurafsky, Chris Manning
Stanford University
{mgalley,jurafsky,manning}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Existing evaluation metrics for machine translation
lack crucial robustness: their correlations with human quality judgments vary considerably across languages and genres. We believe that the main reason
is their inability to properly capture meaning: A good
translation candidate means the same thing as the
reference translation, regardless of formulation. We
propose a metric that evaluates MT output based on
a rich set of features motivated by textual entailment,
such as lexical-semantic (in-)compatibility and argument structure overlap. We compare this metric
against a combination metric of four state-of-theart scores (BLEU, NIST, TER, and METEOR) in
two different settings. The combination metric outperforms the individual scores, but is bested by the
entailment-based metric. Combining the entailment
and traditional features yields further improvements.

1

Introduction

Constant evaluation is vital to the progress of machine translation (MT). Since human evaluation is
costly and difﬁcult to do reliably, a major focus of
research has been on automatic measures of MT
quality, pioneered by BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002)
and NIST (Doddington, 2002). BLEU and NIST
measure MT quality by using the strong correlation between human judgments and the degree of
n-gram overlap between a system hypothesis translation and one or more reference translations. The
resulting scores are cheap and objective.
However, studies such as Callison-Burch et al.
(2006) have identiﬁed a number of problems with
BLEU and related n-gram-based scores: (1) BLEUlike metrics are unreliable at the level of individual
sentences due to data sparsity; (2) BLEU metrics
can be “gamed” by permuting word order; (3) for
some corpora and languages, the correlation to human ratings is very low even at the system level;
(4) scores are biased towards statistical MT; (5) the
quality gap between MT and human translations is
not reﬂected in equally large BLEU differences.
∗ This paper is based on work funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency through IBM. The content
does not necessarily reﬂect the views of the U.S. Government,
and no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.

This is problematic, but not surprising: The metrics treat any divergence from the reference as a
negative, while (computational) linguistics has long
dealt with linguistic variation that preserves the
meaning, usually called paraphrase, such as:
(1) HYP: However, this was declared terrorism
by observers and witnesses.
REF: Nevertheless, commentators as well as
eyewitnesses are terming it terrorism.
A number of metrics have been designed to account
for paraphrase, either by making the matching more
intelligent (TER, Snover et al. (2006)), or by using
linguistic evidence, mostly lexical similarity (METEOR, Banerjee and Lavie (2005); MaxSim, Chan
and Ng (2008)), or syntactic overlap (Owczarzak et
al. (2008); Liu and Gildea (2005)). Unfortunately,
each metrics tend to concentrate on one particular type of linguistic information, none of which
always correlates well with human judgments.
Our paper proposes two strategies. We ﬁrst explore the combination of traditional scores into a
more robust ensemble metric with linear regression.
Our second, more fundamental, strategy replaces
the use of loose surrogates of translation quality
with a model that attempts to comprehensively assess meaning equivalence between references and
MT hypotheses. We operationalize meaning equivalence by bidirectional textual entailment (RTE,
Dagan et al. (2005)), and thus predict the quality of MT hypotheses with a rich RTE feature set.
The entailment-based model goes beyond existing
word-level “semantic” metrics such as METEOR
by integrating phrasal and compositional aspects
of meaning equivalence, such as multiword paraphrases, (in-)correct argument and modiﬁcation
relations, and (dis-)allowed phrase reorderings. We
demonstrate that the resulting metric beats both individual and combined traditional MT metrics. The
complementary features of both metric types can
be combined into a joint, superior metric.

HYP: The virus did not infect anybody.
entailment

entailment

REF: No one was infected by the virus.
HYP: Three aid workers were kidnapped.
no entailment

entailment

REF: Three aid workers were kidnapped by pirates.

Figure 1: Entailment status between an MT system
hypothesis and a reference translation for equivalent (top) and non-equivalent (bottom) translations.

2 Regression-based MT Quality Prediction
Current MT metrics tend to focus on a single dimension of linguistic information. Since the importance
of these dimensions tends not to be stable across
language pairs, genres, and systems, performance
of these metrics varies substantially. A simple strategy to overcome this problem could be to combine
the judgments of different metrics. For example,
Paul et al. (2007) train binary classiﬁers on a feature set formed by a number of MT metrics. We
follow a similar idea, but use a regularized linear
regression to directly predict human ratings.
Feature combination via regression is a supervised approach that requires labeled data. As we
show in Section 5, this data is available, and the
resulting model generalizes well from relatively
small amounts of training data.

3

Textual Entailment vs. MT Evaluation

Our novel approach to MT evaluation exploits the
similarity between MT evaluation and textual entailment (TE). TE was introduced by Dagan et
al. (2005) as a concept that corresponds more
closely to “common sense” reasoning patterns than
classical, strict logical entailment. Textual entailment is deﬁned informally as a relation between
two natural language sentences (a premise P and
a hypothesis H) that holds if “a human reading P
would infer that H is most likely true”. Knowledge
about entailment is beneﬁcial for NLP tasks such as
Question Answering (Harabagiu and Hickl, 2006).
The relation between textual entailment and MT
evaluation is shown in Figure 1. Perfect MT output
and the reference translation entail each other (top).
Translation problems that impact semantic equivalence, e.g., deletion or addition of material, can
break entailment in one or both directions (bottom).
On the modelling level, there is common ground
between RTE and MT evaluation: Both have to

distinguish between valid and invalid variation to
determine whether two texts convey the same information or not. For example, to recognize the
bidirectional entailment in Ex. (1), RTE must account for the following reformulations: synonymy
(However/Nevertheless), more general semantic
relatedness (observers/commentators), phrasal replacements (and/as well as), and an active/passive
alternation that implies structural change (is declared/are terming). This leads us to our main hypothesis: RTE features are designed to distinguish
meaning-preserving variation from true divergence
and are thus also good predictors in MT evaluation.
However, while the original RTE task is asymmetric, MT evaluation needs to determine meaning
equivalence, which is a symmetric relation. We do
this by checking for entailment in both directions
(see Figure 1). Operationally, this ensures we detect
translations which either delete or insert material.
Clearly, there are also differences between the
two tasks. An important one is that RTE assumes
the well-formedness of the two sentences. This is
not generally true in MT, and could lead to degraded linguistic analyses. However, entailment
relations are more sensitive to the contribution of
individual words (MacCartney and Manning, 2008).
In Example 2, the modal modiﬁers break the entailment between two otherwise identical sentences:
(2)

HYP: Peter is certainly from Lincolnshire.
REF: Peter is possibly from Lincolnshire.

This means that the prediction of TE hinges on
correct semantic analysis and is sensitive to misanalyses. In contrast, human MT judgments behave
robustly. Translations that involve individual errors,
like (2), are judged lower than perfect ones, but
usually not crucially so, since most aspects are
still rendered correctly. We thus expect even noisy
RTE features to be predictive for translation quality.
This allows us to use an off-the-shelf RTE system
to obtain features, and to combine them using a
regression model as described in Section 2.
3.1

The Stanford Entailment Recognizer

The Stanford Entailment Recognizer (MacCartney
et al., 2006) is a stochastic model that computes
match and mismatch features for each premisehypothesis pair. The three stages of the system
are shown in Figure 2. The system ﬁrst uses a
robust broad-coverage PCFG parser and a deterministic constituent-dependency converter to construct linguistic representations of the premise and

Premise: India buys 1,000 tanks.
Hypothesis: India acquires arms.

Stage 1: Linguistic analysis
buys
subj

India

acquires
subj

dobj

India

1,000 tanks

dobj

arms

Stage 2: Alignment
buys
subj

India

acquires

0.9

dobj

subj

1,000 tanks
1.0

India

dobj

arms

0.7

Stage 3: Feature computation (w/ numbers of features)
Alignment (8):
Semantic
compatibility
(34):
Insertions and
deletions (20):
Preservation of
reference (16):
Structural
alignment (28):

Overall alignment quality
Modality, Factivity, Polarity,
Quantiﬁcation, Lexical-semantic
relatedness, Tense
Felicity of appositions and adjuncts,
Types of unaligned material
Locations, Dates, Entities
Alignment of main verbs and
syntactically prominent words,
Argument structure (mis-)matches

Figure 2: The Stanford Entailment Recognizer
the hypothesis. The results are typed dependency
graphs that contain a node for each word and labeled edges representing the grammatical relations
between words. Named entities are identiﬁed, and
contiguous collocations grouped. Next, it identiﬁes
the highest-scoring alignment from each node in
the hypothesis graph to a single node in the premise
graph, or to null. It uses a locally decomposable
scoring function: The score of an alignment is the
sum of the local word and edge alignment scores.
The computation of these scores make extensive
use of about ten lexical similarity resources, including WordNet, InfoMap, and Dekang Lin’s thesaurus. Since the search space is exponential in
the hypothesis length, the system uses stochastic
(rather than exhaustive) search based on Gibbs sampling (see de Marneffe et al. (2007)).
Entailment features. In the third stage, the system produces roughly 100 features for each aligned
premise-hypothesis pair. A small number of them
are real-valued (mostly quality scores), but most
are binary implementations of small linguistic theories whose activation indicates syntactic and se-

mantic (mis-)matches of different types. Figure 2
groups the features into ﬁve classes. Alignment
features measure the overall quality of the alignment as given by the lexical resources. Semantic
compatibility features check to what extent the
aligned material has the same meaning and preserves semantic dimensions such as modality and
factivity, taking a limited amount of context into
account. Insertion/deletion features explicitly address material that remains unaligned and assess its
felicity. Reference features ascertain that the two
sentences actually refer to the same events and participants. Finally, structural features add structural
considerations by ensuring that argument structure
is preserved in the translation. See MacCartney et
al. (2006) for details on the features, and Sections
5 and 6 for examples of feature ﬁrings.
Efﬁciency considerations. The use of deep linguistic analysis makes our entailment-based metric considerably more heavyweight than traditional
MT metrics. The average total runtime per sentence
pair is 5 seconds on an AMD 2.6GHz Opteron core
– efﬁcient enough to perform regular evaluations on
development and test sets. We are currently investigating caching and optimizations that will enable
the use of our metric for MT parameter tuning in a
Minimum Error Rate Training setup (Och, 2003).

4
4.1

Experimental Evaluation
Experiments

Traditionally, human ratings for MT quality have
been collected in the form of absolute scores on a
ﬁve- or seven-point Likert scale, but low reliability numbers for this type of annotation have raised
concerns (Callison-Burch et al., 2008). An alternative that has been adopted by the yearly WMT
evaluation shared tasks since 2008 is the collection
of pairwise preference judgments between pairs of
MT hypotheses which can be elicited (somewhat)
more reliably. We demonstrate that our approach
works well for both types of annotation and different corpora. Experiment 1 models absolute scores
on Asian newswire, and Experiment 2 pairwise
preferences on European speech and news data.
4.2

Evaluation

We evaluate the output of our models both on the
sentence and on the system level. At the sentence
level, we can correlate predictions in Experiment 1
directly with human judgments with Spearman’s ρ,

a non-parametric rank correlation coefﬁcient appropriate for non-normally distributed data. In Experiment 2, the predictions cannot be pooled between
sentences. Instead of correlation, we compute “consistency” (i.e., accuracy) with human preferences.
System-level predictions are computed in both
experiments from sentence-level predictions, as the
ratio of sentences for which each system provided
the best translation (Callison-Burch et al., 2008).
We extend this procedure slightly because realvalued predictions cannot predict ties, while human
raters decide for a signiﬁcant portion of sentences
(as much as 80% in absolute score annotation) to
“tie” two systems for ﬁrst place. To simulate this
behavior, we compute “tie-aware” predictions as
the percentage of sentences where the system’s hypothesis was assigned a score better or at most ε
worse than the best system. ε is set to match the
frequency of ties in the training data.
Finally, the predictions are again correlated with
human judgments using Spearman’s ρ. “Tie awareness” makes a considerable practical difference,
improving correlation ﬁgures by 5–10 points.1
4.3

Baseline Metrics

We consider four baselines. They are small regression models as described in Section 2 over component scores of four widely used MT metrics. To
alleviate possible nonlinearity, we add all features
in linear and log space. Each baselines carries the
name of the underlying metric plus the sufﬁx -R.2
B LEU R includes the following 18 sentence-level
scores: BLEU-n and n-gram precision scores
(1 ≤ n ≤ 4); BLEU brevity penalty (BP); BLEU
score divided by BP. To counteract BLEU’s brittleness at the sentence level, we also smooth BLEU-n
and n-gram precision as in Lin and Och (2004).
N IST R consists of 16 features. NIST-n scores
(1 ≤ n ≤ 10) and information-weighted n-gram
precision scores (1 ≤ n ≤ 4); NIST brevity penalty
(BP); and NIST score divided by BP.
1 Due

to space constraints, we only show results for “tieaware” predictions. See Pad´ et al. (2009) for a discussion.
o
2 The regression models can simulate the behaviour of each
component by setting the weights appropriately, but are strictly
more powerful. A possible danger is that the parameters overﬁt on the training set. We therefore veriﬁed that the three
non-trivial “baseline” regression models indeed confer a beneﬁt over the default component combination scores: BLEU-1
(which outperformed BLEU-4 in the MetricsMATR 2008 evaluation), NIST-4, and TER (with all costs set to 1). We found
higher robustness and improved correlations for the regression
models. An exception is BLEU-1 and NIST-4 on Expt. 1 (Ar,
Ch), which perform 0.5–1 point better at the sentence level.

T ER R includes 50 features. We start with the
standard TER score and the number of each of the
four edit operations. Since the default uniform cost
does not always correlate well with human judgment, we duplicate these features for 9 non-uniform
edit costs. We ﬁnd it effective to set insertion cost
close to 0, as a way of enabling surface variation,
and indeed the new TERp metric uses a similarly
low default insertion cost (Snover et al., 2009).
M ETEOR R
4.4

consists of METEOR v0.7.

Combination Metrics

The following three regression models implement
the methods discussed in Sections 2 and 3.
M T R combines the 85 features of the four baseline models. It uses no entailment features.
RTE R uses the 70 entailment features described
in Section 3.1, but no M T R features.
M T +RTE R uses all M T R and RTE R features,
combining matching and entailment evidence.3

5

Expt. 1: Predicting Absolute Scores

Data. Our ﬁrst experiment evaluates the models
we have proposed on a corpus with traditional annotation on a seven-point scale, namely the NIST
OpenMT 2008 corpus.4 The corpus contains translations of newswire text into English from three
source languages (Arabic (Ar), Chinese (Ch), Urdu
(Ur)). Each language consists of 1500–2800 sentence pairs produced by 7–15 MT systems.
We use a “round robin” scheme. We optimize
the weights of our regression models on two languages and then predict the human scores on the
third language. This gauges performance of our
models when training and test data come from the
same genre, but from different languages, which
we believe to be a setup of practical interest. For
each test set, we set the system-level tie parameter
ε so that the relative frequency of ties was equal
to the training set (65–80%). Hypotheses generally
had to receive scores within 0.3 − 0.5 points to tie.
Results. Table 1 shows the results. We ﬁrst concentrate on the upper half (sentence-level results).
The predictions of all models correlate highly signiﬁcantly with human judgments, but we still see
robustness issues for the individual MT metrics.
3 Software for RTE R and M T +RTE R is available from
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/mteval.shtml.
4 Available from http://www.nist.gov.

Evaluation
Sentence-level
System-level

Data
train
Ar+Ch
Ar+Ur
Ch+Ur
Ar+Ch
Ar+Ur
Ch+Ur

test
Ur
Ch
Ar
Ur
Ch
Ar

B LEU R
49.9
53.9
52.5
73.9
38.5
59.7∗

M ETEOR R
49.1
61.1
60.1
68.4
44.3
86.3∗

N IST R
49.5
53.1
50.4
50.0
40.0
61.9∗

Metrics
T ER R
50.1
50.3
54.5
90.0∗
59.0∗
42.1

MTR
50.1
57.3
55.2
92.7∗
51.8∗
48.1

RTE R
54.5
58.0
59.9
77.4∗
47.7
59.7∗

M T +RTE R
55.6
62.7
61.1
81.0∗
57.3∗
61.7∗

Further analysis. We decided to conduct a thorough analysis of the Urdu dataset, the most difﬁcult
source language for all metrics. We start with a fea5 These results are substantially better than the performance

our metric showed in the MetricsMATR 2008 challenge. Beyond general enhancement of our model, we attribute the less
good MetricsMATR 2008 results to an infelicitous choice
of training data for the submission, coupled with the large
amount of ASR output in the test data, whose disﬂuencies
represent an additional layer of problems for deep approaches.

0.54

q

0.50

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q

q
q

0.46

q

q
q
q

0.42

M ETEOR R achieves the best correlation for Chinese and Arabic, but fails for Urdu, apparently the
most difﬁcult language. T ER R shows the best result
for Urdu, but does worse than M ETEOR R for Arabic and even worse than B LEU R for Chinese. The
M T R combination metric alleviates this problem to
some extent by improving the “worst-case” performance on Urdu to the level of the best individual
metric. The entailment-based RTE R system outperforms M T R on each language. It particularly improves on M T R’s correlation on Urdu. Even though
M ETEOR R still does somewhat better than M T R
and RTE R, we consider this an important conﬁrmation for the usefulness of entailment features in MT
evaluation, and for their robustness.5
In addition, the combined model M T +RTE R is
best for all three languages, outperforming M ETE OR R for each language pair. It performs considerably better than either M T R or RTE R. This is a
second result: the types of evidence provided by
M T R and RTE R appear to be complementary and
can be combined into a superior model.
On the system level (bottom half of Table 1),
there is high variance due to the small number of
predictions per language, and many predictions are
not signiﬁcantly correlated with human judgments.
B LEU R, M ETEOR R, and N IST R signiﬁcantly predict one language each (all Arabic); T ER R, M T R,
and RTE R predict two languages. M T +RTE R is
the only model that shows signiﬁcance for all three
languages. This result supports the conclusions we
have drawn from the sentence-level analysis.

Spearman's rho on MT 08 Ur

Table 1: Expt. 1: Spearman’s ρ for correlation between human absolute scores and model predictions on
NIST OpenMT 2008. Sentence level: All correlations are highly signiﬁcant. System level: ∗ : p<0.05.

20

40

60

Metrics
Mt−RteR
RteR
MtR
MetR

80

100

% Training data MT08 Ar+Ch

Figure 3: Experiment 1: Learning curve (Urdu).
ture ablation study. Removing any feature group
from RTE R results in drops in correlation of at least
three points. The largest drops occur for the structural (δ = −11) and insertion/deletion (δ = −8)
features. Thus, all feature groups appear to contribute to the good correlation of RTE R. However,
there are big differences in the generality of the
feature groups: in isolation, the insertion/deletion
features achieve almost no correlation, and need to
be complemented by more robust features.
Next, we analyze the role of training data. Figure 3 shows Urdu average correlations for models
trained on increasing subsets of the training data
(10% increments, 10 random draws per step; Ar
and Ch show similar patterns.) M ETEOR R does not
improve, which is to be expected given the model
deﬁnition. RTE R has a rather ﬂat learning curve
that climbs to within 2 points of the ﬁnal correlation value for 20% of the training set (about 400
sentence pairs). Apparently, entailment features do
not require a large training set, presumably because
most features of RTE R are binary. The remaining
two models, M T R and M T +RTE R, show clearer
beneﬁt from more data. With 20% of the total data,
they climb to within 5 points of their ﬁnal performance, but keep slowly improving further.

REF: I shall face that fact today.
HYP: Today I will face this reality.
[doc WL-34-174270-7483871, sent 4, system1]

REF: What does BBC’s Haroon Rasheed say after a visit to Lal Masjid Jamia
Hafsa complex? There are no underground tunnels in Lal Masjid or Jamia
Hafsa. The presence of the foreigners could not be conﬁrmed as well. What
became of the extremists like Abuzar?
HYP: BBC Haroon Rasheed Lal Masjid, Jamia Hafsa after his visit to Auob
Medical Complex says Lal Masjid and seminary in under a land mine, not
also been conﬁrmed the presence of foreigners could not be, such as Abu by
the extremist? [doc WL-12-174261-7457007, sent 2, system2]

Gold: 6
M ETEOR R: 2.8
RTE R: 6.1
• Only function words unaligned (will, this)
• Alignment fact/reality: hypernymy is ok
in upward monotone context
Gold: 1
M ETEOR R: 4.5
RTE R: 1.2
• Hypothesis root node unaligned
• Missing alignments for subjects
• Important entities in hypothesis cannot be
aligned
• Reference, hypothesis differ in polarity

Table 2: Expt. 1: Reference translations and MT output (Urdu). Scores are out of 7 (higher is better).
Finally, we provide a qualitative comparison of
RTE R’s performance against the best baseline metric, M ETEOR R. Since the computation of RTE R
takes considerably more resources than M ETEOR R,
it is interesting to compare the predictions of RTE R
against M ETEOR R. Table 2 shows two classes of
examples with apparent improvements.

6 Expt. 2: Predicting Pairwise Preferences

The ﬁrst example (top) shows a good translation
that is erroneously assigned a low score by M E TEOR R because (a) it cannot align fact and reality
(M ETEOR R aligns only synonyms) and (b) it punishes the change of word order through its “penalty”
term. RTE R correctly assigns a high score. The
features show that this prediction results from two
semantic judgments. The ﬁrst is that the lack of
alignments for two function words is unproblematic; the second is that the alignment between fact
and reality, which is established on the basis of
WordNet similarity, is indeed licensed in the current context. More generally, we ﬁnd that RTE R
is able to account for more valid variation in good
translations because (a) it judges the validity of
alignments dependent on context; (b) it incorporates more semantic similarities; and (c) it weighs
mismatches according to the word’s status.

Data. This experiment uses the 2006–2008 corpora of the Workshop on Statistical Machine
Translation (WMT).7 It consists of data from EUROPARL (Koehn, 2005) and various news commentaries, with ﬁve source languages (French, German, Spanish, Czech, and Hungarian). As training
set, we use the portions of WMT 2006 and 2007
that are annotated with absolute scores on a ﬁvepoint scale (around 14,000 sentences produced by
40 systems). The test set is formed by the WMT
2008 relative rank annotation task. As in Experiment 1, we set ε so that the incidence of ties in the
training and test set is equal (60%).

The second example (bottom) shows a very bad
translation that is scored highly by M ETEOR R,
since almost all of the reference words appear either
literally or as synonyms in the hypothesis (marked
in italics). In combination with M ETEOR R’s concentration on recall, this is sufﬁcient to yield a
moderately high score. In the case of RTE R, a number of mismatch features have ﬁred. They indicate
problems with the structural well-formedness of
the MT output as well as semantic incompatibility between hypothesis and reference (argument
structure and reference mismatches).

In this experiment, we predict human pairwise preference judgments (cf. Section 4). We reuse the
linear regression framework from Section 2 and
predict pairwise preferences by predicting two absolute scores (as before) and comparing them.6

Results. Table 4 shows the results. The left result
column shows consistency, i.e., the accuracy on
human pairwise preference judgments.8 The pattern of results matches our observations in Expt. 1:
Among individual metrics, M ETEOR R and T ER R
do better than B LEU R and N IST R. M T R and RTE R
outperform individual metrics. The best result by a
wide margin, 52.5%, is shown by M T +RTE R.
6 We also experimented with a logistic regression model
that predicts binary preferences directly. Its performance is
comparable; see Pad´ et al. (2009) for details.
o
7 Available from http://www.statmt.org/.
8 The random baseline is not 50%, but, according to our
experiments, 39.8%. This has two reasons: (1) the judgments
include contradictory and tie annotations that cannot be predicted correctly (raw inter-annotator agreement on WMT 2008
was 58%); (2) metrics have to submit a total order over the
translations for each sentence, which introduces transitivity
constraints. For details, see Callison-Burch et al. (2008).

Segment
REF: Scottish NHS boards need to improve criminal records checks for
employees outside Europe, a watchdog has said.

MTR
Rank: 3

RTE R
Rank: 1

M T +RTE R
Rank: 2

Gold
Rank: 1

Rank: 5

Rank: 2

Rank: 4

Rank: 5

HYP: The Scottish health ministry should improve the controls on extracommunity employees to check whether they have criminal precedents,
said the monitoring committee. [1357, lium-systran]
REF: Arguments, bullying and ﬁghts between the pupils have extended
to the relations between their parents.
HYP: Disputes, chicane and ﬁghts between the pupils transposed in
relations between the parents. [686, rbmt4]

Table 3: Expt. 2: Reference translations and MT output (French). Ranks are out of ﬁve (smaller is better).
Feature set
B LEU R
M ETEOR R
N IST R
T ER R
MTR
RTE R
M T +RTE R
WMT 08 (worst)
WMT 08 (best)

Consistency (%)
49.6
51.1
50.2
51.2
51.5
51.8
52.5
44
56

System-level
correlation (ρ)
69.3
72.6
70.4
72.5
73.1
78.3
75.8
37
83

Table 4: Expt. 2: Prediction of pairwise preferences
on the WMT 2008 dataset.
The right column shows Spearman’s ρ for the
correlation between human judgments and tieaware system-level predictions. All metrics predict
system scores highly signiﬁcantly, partly due to the
larger number of systems compared (87 systems).
Again, we see better results for M ETEOR R and
T ER R than for B LEU R and N IST R, and the individual metrics do worse than the combination models. Among the latter, the order is: M T R (worst),
M T +RTE R, and RTE R (best at 78.3).
WMT 2009. We submitted the Expt. 2 RTE R
metric to the WMT 2009 shared MT evaluation
task (Pad´ et al., 2009). The results provide furo
ther validation for our results and our general approach. At the system level, RTE R made third place
(avg. correlation ρ = 0.79), trailing the two top metrics closely (ρ = 0.80, ρ = 0.83) and making the
best predictions for Hungarian. It also obtained the
second-best consistency score (53%, best: 54%).
Metric comparison. The pairwise preference annotation of WMT 2008 gives us the opportunity to
compare the M T R and RTE R models by computing consistency separately on the “top” (highestranked) and “bottom” (lowest-ranked) hypotheses

for each reference. RTE R performs about 1.5 percent better on the top than on the bottom hypotheses. The M T R model shows the inverse behavior,
performing 2 percent worse on the top hypotheses. This matches well with our intuitions: We see
some noise-induced degradation for the entailment
features, but not much. In contrast, surface-based
features are better at detecting bad translations than
at discriminating among good ones.
Table 3 further illustrates the difference between
the top models on two example sentences. In the top
example, RTE R makes a more accurate prediction
than M T R. The human rater’s favorite translation
deviates considerably from the reference in lexical choice, syntactic structure, and word order, for
which it is punished by M T R (rank 3/5). In contrast,
RTE R determines correctly that the propositional
content of the reference is almost completely preserved (rank 1). In the bottom example, RTE R’s
prediction is less accurate. This sentence was rated
as bad by the judge, presumably due to the inappropriate main verb translation. Together with the
subject mismatch, M T R correctly predicts a low
score (rank 5/5). RTE R’s attention to semantic overlap leads to an incorrect high score (rank 2/5).
Feature Weights. Finally, we make two observations about feature weights in the RTE R model.
First, the model has learned high weights not
only for the overall alignment score (which behaves most similarly to traditional metrics), but also
for a number of binary syntacto-semantic match
and mismatch features. This conﬁrms that these
features systematically confer the beneﬁt we have
shown anecdotally in Table 2. Features with a consistently negative effect include dropping adjuncts,
unaligned or poorly aligned root nodes, incompatible modality between the main clauses, person
and location mismatches (as opposed to general
mismatches) and wrongly handled passives. Con-

versely, higher scores result from factors such as
high alignment score, matching embeddings under
factive verbs, and matches between appositions.
Second, good MT evaluation feature weights are
not good weights for RTE. Some differences, particularly for structural features, are caused by the
low grammaticality of MT data. For example, the
feature that ﬁres for mismatches between dependents of predicates is unreliable on the WMT data.
Other differences do reﬂect more fundamental differences between the two tasks (cf. Section 3). For
example, RTE puts high weights onto quantiﬁer
and polarity features, both of which have the potential of inﬂuencing entailment decisions, but are (at
least currently) unimportant for MT evaluation.

7

Related Work

Researchers have exploited various resources to enable the matching between words or n-grams that
are semantically close but not identical. Banerjee
and Lavie (2005) and Chan and Ng (2008) use
WordNet, and Zhou et al. (2006) and Kauchak
and Barzilay (2006) exploit large collections of
automatically-extracted paraphrases. These approaches reduce the risk that a good translation
is rated poorly due to lexical deviation, but do not
address the problem that a translation may contain
many long matches while lacking coherence and
grammaticality (cf. the bottom example in Table 2).
Thus, incorporation of syntactic knowledge has
been the focus of another line of research. Amig´
o
et al. (2006) use the degree of overlap between the
dependency trees of reference and hypothesis as a
predictor of translation quality. Similar ideas have
been applied by Owczarzak et al. (2008) to LFG
parses, and by Liu and Gildea (2005) to features
derived from phrase-structure tress. This approach
has also been successful for the related task of
summarization evaluation (Hovy et al., 2006).
e
The most comparable work to ours is Gim´ nez
and M´ rquez (2008). Our results agree on the crua
cial point that the use of a wide range of linguistic
knowledge in MT evaluation is desirable and important. However, Gim´ nez and M´ rquez advocate
e
a
the use of a bottom-up development process that
builds on a set of “heterogeneous”, independent
metrics each of which measures overlap with respect to one linguistic level. In contrast, our aim
is to provide a “top-down”, integrated motivation
for the features we integrate through the textual
entailment recognition paradigm.

8

Conclusion and Outlook

In this paper, we have explored a strategy for the
evaluation of MT output that aims at comprehensively assessing the meaning equivalence between
reference and hypothesis. To do so, we exploit the
common ground between MT evaluation and the
Recognition of Textual Entailment (RTE), both of
which have to distinguish valid from invalid linguistic variation. Conceputalizing MT evaluation
as an entailment problem motivates the use of a
rich feature set that covers, unlike almost all earlier
metrics, a wide range of linguistic levels, including
lexical, syntactic, and compositional phenomena.
We have used an off-the-shelf RTE system to
compute these features, and demonstrated that a
regression model over these features can outperform an ensemble of traditional MT metrics in two
experiments on different datasets. Even though the
features build on deep linguistic analysis, they are
robust enough to be used in a real-world setting, at
least on written text. A limited amount of training
data is sufﬁcient, and the weights generalize well.
Our data analysis has conﬁrmed that each of the
feature groups contributes to the overall success of
the RTE metric, and that its gains come from its
better success at abstracting away from valid variation (such as word order or lexical substitution),
while still detecting major semantic divergences.
We have also clariﬁed the relationship between MT
evaluation and textual entailment: The majority of
phenomena (but not all) that are relevant for RTE
are also informative for MT evaluation.
The focus of this study was on the use of an existing RTE infrastructure for MT evaluation. Future
work will have to assess the effectiveness of individual features and investigate ways to customize RTE
systems for the MT evaluation task. An interesting
aspect that we could not follow up on in this paper
is that entailment features are linguistically interpretable (cf. Fig. 2) and may ﬁnd use in uncovering
systematic shortcomings of MT systems.
A limitation of our current metric is that it is
language-dependent and relies on NLP tools in
the target language that are still unavailable for
many languages, such as reliable parsers. To some
extent, of course, this problem holds as well for
state-of-the-art MT systems. Nevertheless, it must
be an important focus of future research to develop
robust meaning-based metrics for other languages
that can cash in the promise that we have shown
for evaluating translation into English.

References
Enrique Amig´ , Jes´ s Gim´ nez, Julio Gonzalo, and
o
u
e
Llu´s M` rquez. 2006. MT Evaluation: Humanı
a
like vs. human acceptable. In Proceedings of COLING/ACL 2006, pages 17–24, Sydney, Australia.
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An automatic metric for MT evaluation with improved correlation with human judgments. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic Evaluation Measures, pages 65–72, Ann Arbor, MI.

Phillip Koehn. 2005. Europarl: A parallel corpus for
statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the
MT Summit X, Phuket, Thailand.
Chin-Yew Lin and Franz Josef Och. 2004. ORANGE:
a method for evaluating automatic evaluation metrics for machine translation. In Proceedings of COLING, pages 501–507, Geneva, Switzerland.
Ding Liu and Daniel Gildea. 2005. Syntactic features
for evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Intrinsic and Extrinsic
Evaluation Measures, pages 25–32, Ann Arbor, MI.

Chris Callison-Burch, Miles Osborne, and Philipp
Koehn. 2006. Re-evaluating the role of BLEU
in machine translation research. In Proceedings of
EACL, pages 249–256, Trento, Italy.

Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. 2008.
Modeling semantic containment and exclusion in
natural language inference. In Proceedings of COLING, pages 521–528, Manchester, UK.

Chris Callison-Burch, Cameron Fordyce, Philipp
Koehn, Christof Monz, and Josh Schroeder. 2008.
Further meta-evaluation of machine translation. In
Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 70–106, Columbus, OH.

Bill MacCartney, Trond Grenager, Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Daniel Cer, and Christopher D. Manning. 2006. Learning to recognize features of
valid textual entailments. In Proceedings of NAACL,
pages 41–48, New York City, NY.

Yee Seng Chan and Hwee Tou Ng. 2008. MAXSIM: A
maximum similarity metric for machine translation
evaluation. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages
55–62, Columbus, Ohio, June.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The PASCAL recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Proceedings of the PASCAL Challenges Workshop on Recognising Textual Entailment,
Southampton, UK.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Trond Grenager, Bill
MacCartney, Daniel Cer, Daniel Ramage, Chlo´
e
Kiddon, and Christopher D. Manning. 2007. Aligning semantic graphs for textual inference and machine reading. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
Symposium, Stanford, CA.
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic evaluation of
machine translation quality using n-gram cooccurrence statistics. In Proceedings of HLT, pages 128–
132, San Diego, CA.
u
e
ı
a
Jes´ s Gim´ nez and Llu´s M´ rquez. 2008. Heterogeneous automatic MT evaluation through nonparametric metric combinations. In Proceedings of
IJCNLP, pages 319–326, Hyderabad, India.
Sanda Harabagiu and Andrew Hickl. 2006. Methods
for using textual entailment in open-domain question answering. In Proceedings of ACL, pages 905–
912, Sydney, Australia.
Eduard Hovy, Chin-Yew Lin, Liang Zhou, and Junichi
Fukumoto. 2006. Automated summarization evaluation with basic elements. In Proceedings of LREC,
Genoa, Italy.
David Kauchak and Regina Barzilay. 2006. Paraphrasing for automatic evaluation. In Proceedings of HLTNAACL, pages 455–462.

Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training
in statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of
ACL, pages 160–167, Sapporo, Japan.
Karolina Owczarzak, Josef van Genabith, and Andy
Way. 2008. Evaluating machine translation with
LFG dependencies. Machine Translation, 21(2):95–
119.
o
Sebastian Pad´ , Michel Galley, Dan Jurafsky, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2009. Textual entailment
features for machine translation evaluation. In Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 37–41, Athens, Greece.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic
evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings
of ACL, pages 311–318, Philadelphia, PA.
Michael Paul, Andrew Finch, and Eiichiro Sumita.
2007. Reducing human assessment of machine
translation quality to binary classiﬁers. In Proceedings of TMI, pages 154–162, Sk¨ vde, Sweden.
o
Matthew Snover, Bonnie Dorr, Richard Schwartz, Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul. 2006. A study
of translation edit rate with targeted human annotation. In Proceedings of AMTA, pages 223–231, Cambridge, MA.
Matthew Snover, Nitin Madnani, Bonnie J. Dorr, and
Richard Schwartz. 2009. Fluency, adequacy, or
HTER? Exploring different human judgments with
a tunable MT metric. In Proceedings of the EACL
Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages
259–268, Athens, Greece.
Liang Zhou, Chin-Yew Lin, and Eduard Hovy. 2006.
Re-evaluating machine translation results with paraphrase support. In Proceedings of EMNLP, pages
77–84, Sydney, Australia.

