Phrasal: A Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation
with Facilities for Extraction and Incorporation of Arbitrary Model Features
Daniel Cer, Michel Galley, Daniel Jurafsky and Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305, USA

Abstract
We present a new Java-based open source
toolkit for phrase-based machine translation.
The key innovation provided by the toolkit
is to use APIs for integrating new features (/knowledge sources) into the decoding model and for extracting feature statistics from aligned bitexts. The package includes a number of useful features written to
these APIs including features for hierarchical reordering, discriminatively trained linear
distortion, and syntax based language models.
Other useful utilities packaged with the toolkit
include: a conditional phrase extraction system that builds a phrase table just for a speciﬁc dataset; and an implementation of MERT
that allows for pluggable evaluation metrics
for both training and evaluation with built in
support for a variety of metrics (e.g., TERp,
BLEU, METEOR).

1

Motivation

Progress in machine translation (MT) depends critically on the development of new and better model
features that allow translation systems to better identify and construct high quality machine translations.
The popular Moses decoder (Koehn et al., 2007)
was designed to allow new features to be deﬁned using factored translation models. In such models, the
individual phrases being translated can be factored
into two or more abstract phrases (e.g., lemma, POStags) that can be translated individually and then
combined in a seperate generation stage to arrive at
the ﬁnal target translation. While greatly enriching
the space of models that can be used for phrasebased machine translation, Moses only allows features that can be deﬁned at the level of individual
words and phrases.
The Phrasal toolkit provides easy-to-use APIs
for the development of arbitrary new model features. It includes an API for extracting feature

statistics from aligned bitexts and for incorporating the new features into the decoding
model. The system has already been used to
develop a number of innovative new features
(Chang et al., 2009;
Galley and Manning, 2008;
Galley and Manning, 2009; Green et al., 2010) and
to build translation systems that have placed well
at recent competitive evaluations, achieving second
place for Arabic to English translation on the NIST
2009 constrained data track.1
We implemented the toolkit in Java because it offers a good balance between performance and developer productivity. Compared to C++, developers using Java are 30 to 200% faster, produce fewer
defects, and correct defects up to 6 times faster
(Phipps, 1999). While Java programs were historically much slower than similar programs written in
C or C++, modern Java virtual machines (JVMs) result in Java programs being nearly as fast as C++
programs (Bruckschlegel, 2005). Java also allows
for trivial code portability across different platforms.
In the remainder of the paper, we will highlight
various useful capabilities, components and modeling features included in the toolkit.

2

Toolkit

The toolkit provides end-to-end support for the creation and evaluation of machine translation models.
Given sentence-aligned parallel text, a new translation system can be built using a single command:
java edu.stanford.nlp.mt.CreateModel \
(source.txt) (target.txt) \
(dev.source.txt) (dev.ref) (model_name)

Running this command will ﬁrst create word
level alignments for the sentences in source.txt
and target.txt using the Berkeley cross-EM aligner
1
http://www.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/tests
/mt/2009/ResultsRelease/currentArabic.html

9
Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010: Demonstration Session, pages 9–12,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics

3

Decoder

Decoding Engines The package includes two decoding engines, one that implements the left-toright beam search algorithm that was ﬁrst introduced with the Pharaoh machine translation system
(Koehn, 2004), and another that provides a recently
developed decoding algorithm for translating with
discontinuous phrases (Galley and Manning, 2010).
Both engines use features written to a common but
extensible feature API, which allows features to be
written once and then loaded into either engine.
Discontinuous phrases provide a mechanism for
systematically translating grammatical constructions. As seen in Fig. 1, using discontinuous phrases
allows us to successfully capture that the Chinese
construction 当 X 的 can be translated as when X.
Multithreading The decoder has robust support
for multithreading, allowing it to take full advantage
of modern hardware that provides multiple CPU
cores. As shown in Fig. 2, decoding speed scales
well when the number of threads being used is increased from one to four. However, increasing the
2
Optionally, GIZA++ (Och and Ney, 2003) can also be used
to create the word-to-word alignments.

10

35
25
15

(Liang et al., 2006).2
From the word-to-word
alignments, the system extracts a phrase table (Koehn et al., 2003) and hierarchical reordering model (Galley and Manning, 2008). Two ngram language models are trained on the target.txt sentences: one over lowercased target sentences that will be used by the Phrasal decoder
and one over the original source sentences that
will be used for truecasing the MT output. Finally, the system trains the feature weights for the
decoding model using minimum error rate training (Och, 2003) to maximize the system’s BLEU
score (Papineni et al., 2002) on the development
data given by dev.source.txt and dev.ref. The toolkit
is distributed under the GNU general public license
(GPL) and can be downloaded from http://
nlp.stanford.edu/software/phrasal.

tranlations per minute

Figure 1: Chinese-to-English translation using discontinuous phrases.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Cores

Figure 2: Multicore translations per minute on a system with two Intel Xeon L5530 processors running at
2.40GHz.

threads past four results in only marginal additional
gains as the cost of managing the resources shared
between the threads is starting to overwhelm the
value provided by each additional thread. Moses
also does not run faster with more than 4-5 threads.3
Feature API The feature API was designed to
abstract away complex implementation details of
the underlying decoding engine and provide a simple consistent framework for creating new decoding
model features. During decoding, as each phrase
that is translated, the system constructs a Featurizable object. As seen in Table 1, Featurizable objects
specify what phrase was just translated and an overall summary of the translation being built. Code that
implements a feature inspects the Featurizable and
returns one or more named feature values. Prior to
translating a new sentence, the sentence is passed to
the active features for a decoding model, so that they
can perform any necessary preliminary analysis.
Comparison with Moses Credible research into
new features requires baseline system performance
that is on par with existing state-of-the-art systems.
Seen in Table 2, Phrasal meets the performance of
Moses when using the exact same decoding model
feature set as Moses and outperforms Moses signiﬁcantly when using its own default feature set.4
3

http://statmt.org/moses
/?n=Moses.AdvancedFeatures (April 6, 2010)
4
Phrasal was originally written to replicate Moses as it was
implemented in 2007 (release 2007-05-29), and the current ver-

Featurizable
Last Translated Phrase Pair
Source and Target Alignments
Partial Translation
Source Sentence
Current Source Coverage
Pointer to Prior Featurizable

Phrasal feature API. These extensions are currently
not included in the release:

Table 1: Information passed to features in the form of a
Featurizable object for each translated phrase.
System
Moses
Phrasal
Phrasal

Features
Moses
Moses
Default

MT06 (tune)
34.23
34.25
35.02

MT03
33.72
33.72
34.98

MT05
32.51
32.49
33.21

Table 2: Comparison of two conﬁgurations of Phrasal
to Moses on Chinese-to-English. One Phrasal conﬁguration uses the standard Moses feature set for single factor
phrase-based translation with distance and phrase level
msd-bidirectional-fe reordering features. The other uses
the default conﬁguration of Phrasal, which replaces the
phrase level msd-bidirectional-fe feature with a heirarchical reordering feature.

4

Features

The toolkit includes the basic eight phrase-based
translation features available in Moses as well as
Moses’ implementation of lexical reordering features. In addition to the common Moses features, we
also include innovative new features that improve
translation quality. One of these features is a hierarchical generalization of the Moses lexical reordering model. Instead of just looking at the reordering relationship between individual phrases, the new
feature examines the reordering of blocks of adjacent phrases (Galley and Manning, 2008) and improves translation quality when the material being
reordered cannot be captured by single phrase. This
hierarchical lexicalized reordering model is used by
default in Phrasal and is responsible for the gains
shown in Table 2 using the default features.
To illustrate how Phrasal can effectively be used
to design rich feature sets, we present an overview
of various extensions that have been built upon the
sion still almost exactly replicates this implementation when
using only the baseline Moses features. To ensure this conﬁguration of the decoder is still competitive, we compared it
against the current Moses implementation (release 2009-0413) and found that the performance of the two systems is still
close. Tthe current Moses implementation obtains slightly
lower BLEU scores, respectively 33.98 and 32.39 on MT06 and
MT05.

11

Target Side Dependency Language Model The
n-gram language models that are traditionally used
to capture the syntax of the target language do a
poor job of modeling long distance syntactic relationships. For example, if there are a number of
intervening words between a verb and its subject,
n-gram language models will often not be of much
help in selecting the verb form that agrees with the
subject. The target side dependency language model
feature captures these long distance relationships by
providing a dependency score for the target translations produced by the decoder. This is done using
an efﬁcient quadratic time algorithm that operates
within the main decoding loop rather than in a separate reranking stage (Galley and Manning, 2009).
Discriminative Distortion The standard distortion cost model used in phrase-based MT systems
such as Moses has two problems. First, it does not
estimate the future cost of known required moves,
thus increasing search errors. Second, the model penalizes distortion linearly, even when appropriate reorderings are performed. To address these problems,
we used the Phrasal feature API to design a new
discriminative distortion model that predicts word
movement during translation and that estimates future cost. These extensions allow us to triple the
distortion limit and provide a statistically signiﬁcant
improvement over the baseline (Green et al., 2010).
Discriminative Reordering with Chinese Grammatical Relations During translation, a source
sentence can be more accurately reordered if the
system knows something about the syntactic relationship between the words in the phrases being reordered. The discriminative reordering with Chinese
grammatical relations feature examines the path between words in a source-side dependency tree and
uses it to evaluate the appropriateness of candidate
phrase reorderings (Chang et al., 2009).

5

Other components

Training Decoding Models The package includes
a comprehensive toolset for training decoding models. It supports MERT training using coordinate descent, Powell’s method, line search along random
search directions, and downhill Simplex. In addition to the BLEU metric, models can be trained

to optimize other popular evaluation metrics such
as METEOR (Lavie and Denkowski, 2009), TERp
(Snover et al., 2009), mWER (Nießen et al., 2000),
and PER (Tillmann et al., 1997). It is also possible
to plug in other new user-created evaluation metrics.
Conditional Phrase Table Extraction Rather
than ﬁrst building a massive phrase table from a parallel corpus and then ﬁltering it down to just what
is needed for a speciﬁc data set, our toolkit supports the extraction of just those phrases that might
be used on a given evaluation set. In doing so, it
dramatically reduces the time required to build the
phrase table and related data structures such as reordering models.
Feature Extraction API In order to assist in the
development of new features, the toolkit provides
an API for extracting feature statistics from a wordaligned parallel corpus. This API ties into the conditional phrase table extraction utility, and thus allows
for the extraction of just those feature statistics that
are relevant to a given data set.

6

Conclusion

Phrasal is an open source state-of-the-art Javabased machine translation system that was designed
speciﬁcally for research into new decoding model
features. The system supports traditional phrasebased translation as well as translation using discontinuous phrases. It includes a number of new and
innovative model features in addition to those typically found in phrase-based translation systems. It is
also packaged with other useful components such as
tools for extracting feature statistics, building phrase
tables for speciﬁc data sets, and MERT training routines that support a number of optimization techniques and evaluation metrics.

Acknowledgements
The Phrasal decoder has beneﬁted from the helpful comments and code contributions of Pi-Chuan
Chang, Spence Green, Karthik Raghunathan,
Ankush Singla, and Huihsin Tseng. The software
presented in this paper is based on work work was
funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency through IBM. The content does not necessarily reﬂect the views of the U.S. Government, and
no ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.

References
Thomas Bruckschlegel. 2005. Microbenchmarking C++,
C#, and Java. C/C++ Users Journal.

12

P. Chang, H. Tseng, D. Jurafsky, and C.D. Manning.
2009. Discriminative reordering with Chinese grammatical relations features. In SSST Workshop at
NAACL.
Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning. 2008. A
simple and effective hierarchical phrase reordering
model. In EMNLP.
Michel Galley and Christopher D. Manning. 2009.
Quadratic-time dependency parsing for machine translation. In ACL.
Michel Galley and Christopher Manning. 2010. Improving phrase-based machine translation with discontiguous phrases. In NAACL.
Spence Green, Michel Galley, and Christopher D. Manning. 2010. Improved models of distortion cost for
statistical machine translation. In In NAACL.
Philipp Koehn, Franz Och, and Daniel Marcu. 2003. Statistical phrase-based translation. In NAACL.
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch,
M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen,
C. Moran, R. Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin,
and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open source toolkit for
statistical machine translation. In ACL.
Philipp Koehn. 2004. Pharaoh: A beam search decoder
for phrase-based statistical machine translation models. In AMTA.
Alon Lavie and Michael J. Denkowski. 2009. The
METEOR metric for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. Machine Translation, 23.
Percy Liang, Ben Taskar, and Dan Klein. 2006. Alignment by agreement. In NAACL.
Sonja Nießen, Franz Josef Och, and Hermann Ney. 2000.
An evaluation tool for machine translation: Fast evaluation for MT research. In LREC.
Franz Josef Och and Hermann Ney. 2003. A systematic comparison of various statistical alignment models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51.
Franz Josef Och. 2003. Minimum error rate training in
statistical machine translation. In ACL.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and WeiJing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In ACL.
Geoffrey Phipps. 1999. Comparing observed bug and
productivity rates for java and C++. Softw. Pract. Exper., 29(4):345–358.
M. Snover, N. Madnani, B.J. Dorr, and R. Schwartz.
2009. Fluency, adequacy, or HTER?: exploring different human judgments with a tunable MT metric. In
SMT workshop at EACL.
C. Tillmann, S. Vogel, H. Ney, A. Zubiaga, and H. Sawaf.
1997. Accelerated DP based search for statistical
translation. In In Eurospeech.

