Romance is so complex
Christopher D. Manning
Stanford University
manning@csli.stanford.edu

In this paper I want to look at what the evidence from Complex Predicates can tell us about the design parameters of an empirically adequate
theory of Universal Grammar (UG). This is a fertile ﬁeld for investigation because, according to the standard assumptions of the ﬁeld, complex
predicates are monoclausal with respect to some properties and multiclausal with respect to others and this tension can only be resolved by
giving up some cherished beliefs. After introducing the problem in Section 1, Sections 2–4 will lay out the basis of the dilemma. Sections 2 and 3
argue that Romance complex predicates have an articulated rightwardbranching phrase structure, and cannot be analyzed as some sort of verb
compound or verbal complex while conversely Section 4 shows how in
many respects a complex predicate does behave just like a single predicate. Hence we require a notion of monoclausality that these complex
predicates satisfy despite their articulated phrase structure.
Section 5 then draws out the implications of this result for theories
that have monostratal syntactic levels (in the sense of Ladusaw 1988)
such as LFG, HPSG or Categorial Grammar.1 While many of the same
concerns occur in a multistratal theory such as GB or RG (and have long
been debated in those frameworks2 ), there is more room for movement
in such a theory, because complex predicates can be multiclausal on one
stratum but monoclausal on another stratum. In a monostratal theory,
the problem is more cleanly cut – on each level, one must regard a complex predicate as either one clause or as embedded clauses – and if a
0

I wish to thank Joan Bresnan, Eve Clark, Ivan Sag, Peter Sells and Alessandro
Zucchi for helpful comments on various previous versions of this paper. Thanks also
to Avery Andrews for interesting me me in this topic and for discussion of many of the
issues involved.
1
LFG has two syntactic levels, c-structure and f-structure, each of which is monostratal, whereas HPSG and CG have only a single monostratal syntactic level.
2
The RG multiclausal analysis of causatives (Gibson and Raposo 1986) is contested
by the monoclausal analysis of Davies and Rosen (1988). The GB analysis of Burzio
(1986) postulates a biclausal D-structure which is transformed into a monoclausal Sstructure by an operation of VP raising, but this violates the Projection Principle
(as was observed by Zubizarreta 1982). Kayne (1989) analyzes complex predicates
as multiclausal at all levels of representation while Picallo (1990) suggests they are
monoclausal at all levels (in particluar, at D- and S-structure).

1

2 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
monostratal theory is to be maintained you have to be prepared to live
with the consequences of that decision.3 In this paper I want to examine
the options, and show how monostratal theories have to be changed if
one adopts what seems to be the most appealing option: that despite the
phrase structural embedding, complex predicates are monoclausal with
respect to such features as grammatical functions and subcategorization.
I will mainly be dealing with HPSG (Pollard and Sag 1987, forthcoming)
and LFG (Kaplan and Bresnan 1982), and Section 5 assumes that the
reader is familiar with the basic workings of these theories. I will not
explicitly discuss Categorial Grammar, but the interested reader will see
that various of the phenomena discussed are also problematic for categorial approaches, such as the Categorial Uniﬁcation Grammar approach
of Beaven (1990). First of all, however, let us step back and review the
basics of the problem for which we wish to ﬁnd an account.

3

There are, of course, other arguments for adopting a monostratal theory of syntax.
In this area, the most fertile pickings are to be found in the line of research begun
by Perlmutter (1971). Perlmutter argued that the ordering of clitics in Spanish could
not be generated as the output of a transformational component and that their distribution must therefore be explained by surface structure constraints. From there it is
but a short jump to notice that, all else being equal, it would be far more economical
to discard deep structure and a transformational component and predict all ordering
from “surface structure constraints”, that is from the grammar of a monostratal theory. While recent work under the banners of “The Mirror Principle” (Baker 1988) and
“Functional Projections” (Pollock 1989) has suggested that morphology can be generated by syntax (more speciﬁcally, Move-α), Perlmutter’s line of argument has recently
been built on by Bonet i Alsina (1991) who makes two telling points. Firstly, it is just
a fact that the ordering among clitics in a language (as phonological forms) is always
the same regardless of whether these clitics are functioning in a single sentence as arguments, adjuncts, inherent clitics (clitics that routinely accompany a verb, forming a
single predicate) or ethicals (ﬁrst and second person dative clitics that express some
sort of discourse function (emotional attachment) but which are not syntactically or
semantically subcategorized or replaceable by a full NP adjunct; see Authier and Reed
1992). This would be unexpected from any approach in which the D-structure position
of clitics was determined by something like the UTAH (Universal Theta Assignment
Hypothesis) (Baker 1988) and where the surface structure position was then determined by constraints on movement (arguments should always appear on the same side
of adjuncts, etc.). Secondly, Bonet looks at the huge variation in clitic ordering among
various dialects and registers of Catalan. To show just a sample of Bonet’s data, the
ordering of a subset of the clitics in Valencian and Barcelon´ is contrasted below:
ı
(i) a. Valencian: 1st person < 2nd person < reﬂexive/impersonal < 3rd accusative
b. Barcelon´ reﬂexive/impersonal < 2nd person < 1st person < 3rd accusative
ı:
Bonet argues that these diﬀerences cannot possibly follow from the very minor syntactic diﬀerences between the dialects, and must be explained by what are essentially
surface structure constraints (in a GB framework, Bonet suggests incorporating these
constraints into a Morphology Component between S-structure and PF).

Romance is so complex / 3
1

Introducing the problem

Complex predicates appear in numerous languages (to name but a few:
Dutch and German (Koster 1987); Gbadi, a Kru language (Koopman
1984, p. 56); Urdu (and other Indian languages) (Butt et al. 1991); Czech,
Jacaltec and Ancash Quechua (Aissen and Perlmutter 1983)), but in this
paper I will conﬁne my discussion to Romance, both because it is particularly well documented there and because various other syntactic phenomena in Romance happen to provide useful diagnostics as to what is
actually going on, whereas in some other language families it can be much
harder to tell. I will draw examples from various Romance languages –
this runs the risk of my being regarded as cavalier, but the basic phenomenon of complex predicates does seem fairly general across Romance;
while other syntactic features may mean that a point can best be illustrated with one language or another, in many cases it could equally well
be exhibited in any Romance language. Space considerations and my theoretical goals discourage me from trying to give a complete description of
the phenomenon in any one language, let alone contrasting all of them.
Complex predicates result when two or more verbs become more
closely associated than they are in an ordinary construction in which one
verb takes a verbal complement as a sister. There are numerous diagnostics that point to this closer relationship, but perhaps the most salient
one in Romance has to do with clitic placement, and so I will illustrate
it ﬁrst.4 With simplex verbs and normal complement taking verbs (analyzed as taking an XCOMP in LFG or a subcategorized VP[SUBCAT NP ]
in HPSG) we observe the following clitic placement behavior:5
(1) a. Sp Luis comi´
o
las manzanas amarillas
Luis eat.3sg.past the apples
yellow
‘Luis ate the yellow apples.’
b.

Luis las
comi´
o
Luis 3pl.fem ate
‘Luis ate them.’

c.

Luis insisti´ en comer las manzanas amarillas
o
Luis insisted on eat.inf the apples
yellow
‘Luis insisted on eating the yellow apples.’

4
At this stage, the use of the word ‘clitic’ is to be understood in the pretheoretical,
traditional sense by which the words in question have customarily been referred to
as ‘object clitics’. Miller (1991) makes persuasive arguments that these items should
actually be analyzed as phrasal aﬃxes, an analysis to which I shall return.
5
I will be using the standard orthographies for all Romance languages. In these
orthographies, the proclitics are normally written as separate words while the enclitics
are written joined to their hosts. I will sometimes set oﬀ enclitics with a hyphen for
clarity. The two bold letters before the ﬁrst sentence in each group of examples indicate
the language: Spanish, French, Italian or Catalan. Except where noted, the Spanish
data in Section 1 is from Aissen and Perlmutter (1983).

4 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
d.
e.

Luis insisti´ en comer-las
o
‘Luis insisted on eating them.’
*Luis las insisti´ en comer
o

Full NP complements follow the verb they are an argument of, but clitics
appear adjacent to the verb that they are an argument of (generally
proclitic to a ﬁnite form and enclitic on an inﬁnitive, though that is not
the entire story). It is impossible for a clitic to ‘ﬂoat’ up onto another
verb, as shown in (1e). Note also that inﬁnitives in Romance are often
preceded by various things that are superﬁcially prepositions, but which
we might view as some sort of marker or complementizer, and which are
selected for by the higher verb (en in (1c–e)). Our theory must thus allow
such selection of inﬁnitives that are marked a certain way.
The behavior of clitics with verbs forming a complex predicate diﬀers
from what was shown above. In these cases the clitic may appear on a
higher verb than the one of which it is a semantic dependent, as shown in
(2b).6 This behavior could be made sense of in terms of the rule for clitic
placement given above if we could optionally regard try to eat as some
sort of ﬁnite complex verb, which a clitic would then appear in front of,
in the usual manner.
(2) a. Sp Luis trat´ de comer-las
o
Luis try of eat.inf-them
‘Luis tried to eat them.’
b.

Luis las trat´ de comer
o

It is the higher verb(s) that license complex predicate formation.
These verbs are nowadays often called light verbs, in contrast to which
normal verbs are called heavy verbs. Romance complex predicates are
conventionally subdivided according to the nature of this verb. One class
contains causatives and permissives, sentences that have sometimes been
described as undergoing a process called ‘reanalysis’. The other class contains a variety of modal and aspectual verbs (including the basic motion
verbs), such as tratar above, which have been described as undergoing
‘restructuring’ (Rizzi 1982 [1978]) and so verbs that allow formation of
this kind of complex predicate are known as restructuring verbs. Except
when dealing with French,7 I will concentrate mainly on these restructuring verbs. Auxiliary verbs are not generally included in the class of
6

The use of the word may is deliberate. In general, ‘clitic climbing’ is a suﬃcient
test for complex predicate formation, but it is not a necessary result of complex predicate formation. There are scattered remarks on this topic throughout the Romance
literature (Rizzi 1982, p. 44, footnote 26 is an early discussion); Moore (1990) oﬀers a
recent (though unorthodox) assessment.
7
Modern French lacks restructuring verbs (though they were present until the 17th
Century).

Romance is so complex / 5
restructuring verbs (mainly because of the existence of the separate Infl
node in GB under which they are placed, though it is far from clear that
this is an adequate analysis, as many languages allow sequences of several
auxiliaries), but if one adopts an auxiliary-as-raising-verb analysis (ﬁrst
suggested in Ross 1967, but later made famous in the GPSG tradition,
and also adopted in LFG) then auxiliary verbs must also be regarded as
restructuring verbs.
The category of restructuring verbs crosscuts various other groupings.
It cannot be explained by the presence of the prepositional marker on the
inﬁnitive, as there are verbs selecting prepositionally marked inﬁnitives
that allow restructuring (tratar de ‘try’ and empezar a ‘begin’) and
verbs which select bare inﬁnitives that don’t allow restructuring (evitar ‘avoid’ and parecer ‘seem’). The distinction is also orthogonal to
whether verbs are Raising or Equi verbs, as there are ones of each sort
in each category (soler ‘tend’ vs. parecer ‘seem’ and tratar (de) ‘try’
vs. insistir (en) ‘insist’). See Aissen and Perlmutter (1983) [1976] for
further details on Spanish restructuring verbs.
The problem that the possibility of clitic climbing presents for a syntactic theory should be readily apparent. ‘Classical’ LFG (Kaplan and
Bresnan 1982) provided no viable means of representing phenomena such
as ‘clitic climbing’. A standard analysis of auxiliaries as raising verbs
taking VPs as XCOMP complements along the lines of Falk (1984) leaves
us with no way to link up a raised clitic with the downstairs verb. The
French sentence in (3a) would have a rightward-branching tree structure
as in (3b) and produce an f-structure along the lines of (3c). We end
up with an illegitimate f-structure and no apparent way to ﬁx it: the
OBJgo renders the upstairs f-structure incoherent, while the downstairs
f-structure lacks an OBJgo and is incomplete.

(3) a. Fr Je vous
ai
apport´ des bonbons
e
I you.dat have brought candy
‘I have brought you sweets.’

b.

S
NP
Je

VP
V
vous ai

VP
V

NP

apport´
e

des bonbons

6 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
c.



SUBJ

PRED



OBJ
go



PRED






XCOMP




“I”

PRED



“you”

‘perfect XCOMP SUBJ’


SUBJ



PRED



OBJ

—
‘bring SUBJ, OBJ, OBJgo
PRED

“candy”















’




Grimshaw’s (1982) analysis of French clitics almost entirely dodges the
issue of clitics climbing onto auxiliaries and other clitic climbing (over
faire and laisser). The one mention of auxiliaries is where the phrase
structure rule (4), her (8), is proposed:
(4) V

→

(Cl)1 (Cl)2 (Cl)3 (Aux) V

but in a footnote, this is disowned, as not a serious proposal (footnote 1,
p. 142):
(8) is not intended as a serious proposal for the analysis of
the French auxiliary. It has been convincingly argued (e.g.,
by Kayne 1975) that clitics and the verb they precede form a
constituent, contrary to the prediction of (8).
In essence, the problem is that clitics are appearing with a verb that they
are not semantically related to and standard LFG cannot link them with
the sort of local dependencies that generally link grammatical functions.8
8

The one approach that could be tried within ‘Classical’ LFG would be to suggest
that auxiliaries and other restructuring verbs optionally subcategorize for athematic
grammatical functions (GFs) which functionally control the same GF in the verbal
complement and something analogous could be proposed in HPSG by putting clitics
onto the SUBCAT list of the auxiliary. For (3), we would postulate an ‘indirect objectto-indirect object’ raising auxiliary verb as follows:
(i) ai

‘have’

(↑PRED) = ‘perfect (↑XCOMP) (↑SUBJ), (↑OBJgoal )’
(↑SUBJ) = (↑XCOMP SUBJ)
(↑OBJgoal ) = (↑XCOMP OBJgoal )

Two immediate problems that appear are that our theory of UG has been substantially
weakened (because now we are postulating that languages can allow any GF to be athematic and any GF to be raised) and that the solution seems unparsimonious, requiring
a lot of variants of each auxiliary: not only can direct and indirect object clitics climb
but also locatives and partitives (French y and en) and most combinations of these
classes. But presuming these objections could be ameliorated by some form of default
rules, how satisfactory is this proposal? It would provide an immediate explanation
of the Passive and Tough Movement facts that appear at the end of this section, but
it would not explain some of the data discussed in Section 4: ‘long object preposing’,
adverb scope and auxiliary selection in Italian. There would be no uniﬁed explanation
of why these phenomena occur with the very same verbs that allow clitic climbing

Romance is so complex / 7
Similar problems arise in the phrase structure grammar tradition (see
the longer discussion in Miller 1991, p. 228ﬀ). A SUBCAT list based
theory of subcategorization and agreement (as developed in Pollard and
Sag forthcoming) allows in a straightforward way for agreement with a
subject or object, or even with a subcategorized oblique, such as a dative,
as occurs in languages such as Basque (Saltarelli 1988), but it does not
allow for clitics or agreement markers to appear on a verb higher than
the one that is subcategorizing for the argument.9 In this sense, clitic
climbing in Romance restructuring appears to violate what Gazdar et
al. (1985) call “Keenan’s principle” – that agreement morphology may
appear on an item A, indicating agreement of A with an item B, only if
the semantic translation of A is a functor of which the translation of B is
an argument.
This problem seems to lead naturally to an approach, born in the
years of TG, that analyzes clitics as moving, by the normal mechanisms
of long-distance movement from the VP in which they are an argument
or agreement marker to a higher verb. At ﬁrst this appeal to movement
seems quite plausible. For example, it is not the case that clitics can move
up over only one verb. Providing that all the higher verbs are restructuring verbs, clitics can move a long way. Rizzi (1982) gives example (5b)
and an informant readily accepted a Spanish example of similar length
(6b):
(5) a. It Maria avrebbe potuto stare per andare a prender-li lei stessa
‘Maria would have been able to be on the point of going to
get them herself.’
b.

Maria li avrebbe potuti stare per andare a prendere lei stessa

(6) a. Sp quiero tratar de terminar de mostrar-te-lo ma˜ana
n
‘I want to try to ﬁnish showing them to you tomorrow.’
b.

te lo quiero tratar de terminar de mostrar ma˜ana
n

or of how these phenomena interact. As the downstairs verb is unchanged, it should
behave the same, but the ‘long object preposing’ facts show that this is not the case.
Finally, we would seem to have no natural explanation for the alternation in causative
constructions between accusative and dative expression of the causee depending on
whether the complement verb subcategorizes for a direct object.
9
I vacillate here between whether to talk about subcategorization or agreement, but
the point is valid for either. This reﬂects both diﬀerences in analysis and variation in the
languages concerned. Regarding the former, the mainstream GB tradition, following
Kayne (1975), has always regarded clitics as satisfying verbal subcategorization (by
being generated in argument positions and then moved) whereas Miller (1991) regards
clitics as agreement morphology (which is also essentially the role they play in the GB
proposals of Jaeggli 1982 and Borer 1984). The variation between languages is that
Spanish (unlike French) has clitic-doubling of at least dative arguments (both a dative
NP and an agreeing clitic appear simultaneously – see example (7c)). These clitics,
at least, seem as though they must be analyzed as agreement markers, regardless of
whether they are viewed as inﬂectional morphology or not.

8 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Thus one might suggest that clitics should be handled in a similar way
to other constituents that can move an unbounded distance from the
predicates of which they are semantically arguments (such as question
words). The details would then depend on the actual theory: a movement
transformation in GB, traces and SLASH inheritance in HPSG, the Foot
Feature Principle in GPSG or perhaps functional uncertainty in LFG.
However, there is a lot of other evidence that what happens in restructuring should result in something that behaves as a unit for certain
syntactic processes so that this sort of clitic climbing is really still a local
dependency, not a long distance one. Certain processes that are widely
regarded as applying to a lexical item (which we wish to maintain as local processes), can happen to an entire complex predicate. Perhaps the
canonical example is the passive (cf. the analysis of Passive as a lexical
rule in Bresnan 1982b and Gazdar et al. 1985, or Pollard and Sag 1987,
forthcoming). While this is not possible with all restructuring verbs (see
Aissen and Perlmutter 1983), certain Spanish restructuring verbs permit
the formation of ‘long passives’ while such a process is impossible with
ordinary verbal-complement-taking verbs, as it is in English:
(7) a. Sp Los obreros est´n terminando de pintar estas paredes
a
‘The workers are ﬁnishing painting these walls.’
b.

Estas paredes est´n siendo terminadas de pintar (por los
a
obreros)
‘These walls are being ﬁnished to paint (by the workers).’

c.

Les
pintan
las paredes a los due˜os
n
3pl.dat paint.3pl.pres the walls for the landlords
‘They paint the walls for the landlords.’

d.

Estas paredes les est´n siendo terminadas de pintar a los
a
due˜os
n
‘These walls are being ﬁnished to paint for the landlords.’

e.

*Estas paredes est´n siendo terminadas de pintar-les a los
a
due˜os
n

The (complex predicate) sentence (7a) can be passivized as shown in (7b).
(7d) gives further conﬁrmation of what is going on. As shown in (7c) an
indirect object is doubled by a matching clitic appearing on the verb.
In the passive of (7d), the doubling clitic (necessarily) climbs so as to
appear before the passive auxiliary, again indicating how all the verbs in
this sentence appear to be acting (in some sense) like one large verb.
The case of Tough Movement is similar. In contrast to English, tough
movement in Romance is normally strictly clause bounded and an example like (8) is impossible:

Romance is so complex / 9
(8) Sp *Tales cosas son dif´
ıciles de insistir en hacer
‘Such things are diﬃcult to insist on doing.’
But, in the case of a restructuring verb, a pair of verbs again seems to act
like a single complex verb, and ‘long distance’ tough movement becomes
possible:
(9) Sp Estos mapas ser´n dif´
a
ıciles de empezar a hacer
‘These maps will be diﬃcult to begin to make.’
These contrasts between appearing monoclausal and multiclausal are the
essence of the dilemma as to how to treat complex predicates.
2

Analysis as a verbal compound is impossible

One might initially think that the verbs in a complex predicate form
some sort of verbal compound. A slightly more sophisticated version of
this is a coanalysis account where a sentence has separate syntactic and
morphological structures. Such an account is presented in Di Sciullo and
Williams (1987) (following on from proposals of Williams 1979 and Zubizarreta 1985). Di Sciullo and Williams suggest the following structure
for restructuring sentences (where the syntactic structure is shown above
the words and the relevant part of the morphosyntactic structure is shown
below the words):
(10) a. It Mario vuole leggere questo libro
‘Mario wants to read this book.’
b.

S
NP
Mario

VP
V

VP

volere

V

NP

V0

leggere

questo libro

V0
V0
However, this position seems untenable. The evidence that Rizzi (1982,
p. 33ﬀ) presented against base generation of a compound verb is weakened
in the face of the proposal in (10b) to the extent that coanalysis lets you
have the best of both worlds, but the fact that various kinds of adverbials
can appear between a restructuring verb and its complement (Rizzi 1982,
p. 38) still seems problematic:

10 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
(11) It lo verro
subito a scrivere
it I-will-come at once to write
‘I will come at once to write it.’
Earlier Kayne (1975, p. 217ﬀ) had presented similar evidence from French
that the causative verb faire and the verb of its complement do not form
a constituent because they can also be split up by negatives and adverbial
phrases:
(12) a. Fr Il ne fera pas partir Jean
‘He will not make Jean leave.’
b.

aucun doute pleurer
sans
Ils la feront
they her will.make without any doubt cry
‘They will no doubt make her cry.’

c.

Elles feront
toutes les trois soigneusement contrˆler
o
they make.fut all
the three carefully
check
leurs voitures
their cars
‘They will all three have their cars checked carefully.’

Consider also how prepositional markers in Italian and Spanish and the
reﬂexive clitic se in French can occur within this compound verb and
how a putative ‘compound verb’ can be split up in questions (and in
imperatives):
(13) a. Fr Fera-t-il
partir Marie?
will.make-he to.leave Marie
‘Will he make Marie leave?’
b.

Vous a-t-elle d´ja ´t´ pr´sent´e?
e ee e
e
‘Has she already been introduced to you?’

A compound verb analysis seems to be dead in the water. Di Sciullo and
Williams (1987) attempt to deal with the adverb facts by suggesting that
adverbs compound with a verb which then compounds with another verb
(citing independent evidence of adverb-verb compounds), but it seems
implausible that all the phenomena mentioned above duplicate syntax in
the morphology in this way, and, indeed, such an analysis is abandoned
in Di Sciullo and Rosen (1990) (see also Di Sciullo and Williams 1987,
footnote 6, p. 101).
However, there are some restrictions on what can appear between the
verbal elements involved in restructuring or reanalysis in Romance; in
particular no NP argument (what Di Sciullo and Rosen 1990 refer to as
“referential items”) can appear between them. While the account of Di
Sciullo and Rosen both exploits and attempts to explain this fact, it is
unclear whether this fact should be deeply engrained in our theory of UG,

Romance is so complex / 11
as this does not seem to be the case universally. Butt et al. (1991) argue
that intervening NP arguments can break up a complex predicate in Urdu
and Aissen and Perlmutter (1983) concluded their article with similar
evidence using data from Ancash Quechua and Czech. But, at any rate,
we clearly do not have a compound verb, and, in fact, we shall argue below
that there seems to be a much closer relationship between clitics and a
ﬁnite verb than between two verbs that are engaged in ‘restructuring’.
3

The introduction of a verbal complex is not a viable option

In the ﬁrst section we assumed that sentences with restructuring had
a rightward-branching structure. But even if it is not possible to say
that the several verbs of a complex predicate are morphologically a single
word, another possible option is to suggest that the verbs still form some
sort of syntactic verbal complex. In other words, the suggestion would
be that the phrase structure is more like (14b) than (14a).
(14) a.

S
NP
Je

VP
V
vous ai

VP
NP

apport´
e
b.

V

des bonbons

S
NP

VP
Cl

V

NP

vous

Je

ai apport´
e

des bonbons

For the internal structure of the verbal complex itself, there are then three
consistent possibilities to be entertained: it could be leftward-branching,
ﬂat or rightward-branching. The two branching structures have been
proposed by Emonds (1978) and Bratt (1990) respectively, and something
like a ﬂat option was proposed in Aissen (1979), though she actually
advocated a totally ﬂat structure in which all the elements of the VP
(verbs, clitics and subcategorized complements) were sisters.
The phrase structure shown in (14a) is the one now almost universally
assumed by Romance linguists (among others see: Morin 1979, Burzio
1986, Zagona 1988, Picallo 1990), but one could argue that this is in part
due simply to recent developments in GB X-bar theory that have made
anything other than rightward-branching binary trees unﬁt for publication (despite the meager evidence that this position is true in general).

12 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
However, in this case there seems to be good evidence for this phrase
structure. Evidence for (14a) is of two sorts: that clitics and the ﬁrst verbal element appear to be a constituent and that the lower VP shown in
(14a) appears to be a constituent. Evidence for both these positions will
be presented below. Neither of these results is consistent with any of the
options subsumed by the tree in (14b), regardless of the verbal complex’s
internal structure (nor with a totally ﬂat structure of the sort proposed
by Aissen (1979) or Grimshaw (1982)). Hence, I adopt structure (14a) as
correct.
3.1

Arguments for the clitics and ﬁrst verb being a constituent

Beginning at least with Kayne (1975, p. 81) it has been argued against a
verbal complex hypothesis that “rather the pronoun and verb are more
closely bound together.” Indeed Miller (1991) argues that the so-called
French clitics are not really clitics at all, but rather inﬂectional morphology on verb forms. Kayne (1975) cited evidence such as the following:
1. Nothing is allowed between a clitic and the verb (except other clitics).
2. Clitics can’t be modiﬁed or contrastively stressed.
3. Clitics can’t appear without a verb.
4. Clitics can’t be conjoined (*Jean le et la voit.).
5. The ordering of clitics diﬀers from normal complement ordering
(and depends on morphological features like the person of the clitic).
6. There are limitations and arbitrary restrictions on the types of clitic
complements that can occur simultaneously (one can have 3rd person direct and indirect object clitics simultaneously but not 1st
and/or 2nd person ones).
If one believes a subject clitic is in [Spec, IP], and derives subject-verb
inversion via verb movement, another piece of evidence is that the nonsubject clitics then appear to move with the verb:
(15) Fr [v0 Me le donneras]i -tu ti ?
‘Will you give it to me?’
However, admittedly, this last is only evidence if you buy the assumptions
that it depends on.10
10

Two reasons to be suspicious of this argument are that in French, unlike English,
‘inversion’ occurs only with clitic subjects and not with full NP subjects:
(i) a.

A-t-il parl´?
e

c. *A Jean parl´?
e

b. Has he spoken?
d. Has John spoken?

Romance is so complex / 13
Miller (1991) builds a case on the basis of the criteria of Zwicky and
Pullum (1983, henceforth Z&P) that French clitics are actually morphological aﬃxes. While I think I will remain somewhat agnostic on this
distinction, Miller provides further evidence for the close relationship between French ‘clitics’ and the ﬁrst verbal element. He shows that the
‘clitics’ cannot just be analyzed as VP-initial elements, as negatives and
adverbs can appear at the front of the VP, but clitics still appear with
the verb:
(16) a. Fr Il faut [vp ne rien lui donner]
‘It is necessary to give him nothing.’
b.

Il semble [vp tout lui donner]
‘He seems to give him everything.’

Further an analysis claiming VP-initial clitic placement could not possibly
be maintained in other Romance languages where clitics appear enclitic
on an inﬁnitive, as in the following example (where concomitant with
restructuring, the clitic lo has climbed but appears enclitic on the higher
verb along with the verb’s own clitic te):
(17) Sp Quiero permit´
ır-te-lo
hacer
want.1sg permit.inf-you-it do.inf
‘I want to allow you to do it.’
This indicates selection of a host (Z&P Criterion A). There are arbitrary
gaps in the set of combinations (Z&P Criterion B). The most famous is
what is sometimes known as the *me lui constraint which prohibits the
appearance of a ﬁrst or second person clitic serving as direct object when
there is a third person indirect object clitic:
(18) Fr *Il me lui a pr´sent´
e
e
‘He presented me to him.’
but see Miller (1991, pp. 175–176) for others (impossibility of clitics on
past positive imperatives, non-appearance of je in inverted contexts).
There are a few phonological idiosyncrasies that are stem-speciﬁc
(Z&P criterion C), such as Je sais → chais [ e], and a number of others
that are not stem-speciﬁc, but still not purely phonological, such as elision of tu in colloquial speech (T’as pas cent balles? ‘Don’t you have 100
 

and that in cases of ‘complex inversion’ one can get both a subject NP and the subject
clitic:
(ii) Quel livre Jean a-t-il lu?
Which book Jean has he read?
However, if one accepts the GB analysis of Rizzi and Roberts (1989), this remains
a valid argument: il is generated in [Spec, IP] while a full NP subject starts VPinternally; the leftmost verb, together with its non-subject clitics moves leftward into
C0 and il then cliticizes onto it. See Rizzi and Roberts (1989) for further discussion of
these issues.

14 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
francs?’) (Miller 1991, pp. 176–178). Finally Miller argues that conjunction facts provide strong evidence for aﬃxal status, but we will defer this
evidence to the next section.
Thus Miller argues that French pronominal clitics should be treated
as aﬃxes. In a lexicalist theory, it thus necessarily follows that these
‘clitics’ and their host are a unitary constituent. At the very least we
already have strong evidence against a verbal complex analysis.
3.2

Nested VPs are a constituent

The best evidence for the lower nested VPs being constituents comes from
examining conjunction (the facts that we consider in this section come
from Kayne 1975, p. 97, though he was unable to provide a satisfactory
interpretation for them within his model which involved gapping following
sentential conjunction (see Miller 1991)). With simplex verb forms, a
clitic cannot have wide scope over two conjuncts. The clitic must be
repeated as shown in the examples below:11
(19) a. Fr Paul la d´teste et la consid`re comme fort bˆte
e
e
e
‘Paul hates her and considers her very stupid.’
b.
c.
d.

*Paul la d´teste et consid`re comme fort bˆte
e
e
e
Paul te bousculera et te poussera contre Marie
‘Paul will bump into you and push you against Marie.’
*Paul te bousculera et poussera contre Marie

Miller observes that this is strong evidence for these ‘clitics’ being aﬃxes
rather than clitics, as clitics usually can take wide scope in this way
11

There is a slight wrinkle in this data. An object clitic having wide scope over a
conjunction of simplex verb forms is possible when two verbs are semantically very
closely related (Kayne 1975, p. 97). For example, the following sentence is possible:
(i) Fr

Paul les lit et relit sans cesse
‘Paul has read and reread them without cease.’

Note that this is only possible with V0 coordination, so that the related sentence (ii)
is unacceptable.
(ii) Fr

*Paul les lit tr`s vite et relit soigneusement par la suite
e
‘Paul reads them very quickly and rereads them carefully afterwards.’

Further, the important thing to remember is that this is not generally possible, so
Kayne stars the following:
(iii) Fr

*Jean vous parlera et pardonnera
‘Jean will speak to you and forgive you.’

In the cases where this can happen we clearly have two conjoined verbs acting cognitively as a single unit, and they could plausibly be argued to be a lexicalized compound. Miller (1991, p. 159) reaches similar conclusions about these exceptional cases
and quotes Blanche-Benv´niste (1975) who gives the following characterization of these
e
cases: “la seule exception concerne les couples de verbes s´mantiquement apparent´s
e
e
et d’usage fr´quent.”
e

Romance is so complex / 15
(contrast English John and Mary’ll eat together tonight). At any rate
further examination of this phenomenon gives us compelling evidence for
embedded rightward-branching VPs. For we observe that in compound
tenses, just this sort of wide scope becomes possible:12
(20) a. Fr Paul m’a bouscul´ et pouss´ contre Marie
e
e
‘Paul bumped into me and pushed me against Marie.’
b.

Paul l’a insult´ et mis ` la porte
e
a
‘Paul insulted him and threw him out.’

c.

La bonne femme les a cuits au four et fait manger ` son ﬁls
a
‘The woman cooked them in the oven and had her son eat
them.’

Here the clitic is and must be interpreted as also being an argument of
the second verb (which subcategorizes for a direct object). This contrast
between simple and compound verb tenses makes very little sense if we
believe that there is a verbal complex. Under that assumption we have
to suppose a gapped structure for conjunctions something like this:
(21)

S
NP

VP

Paul

VP
Cl

et

m’

V

contre Marie

V

a

PP

pouss´
e

V

V

V
bouscul´
e

However, we can make perfect sense of these examples if we use the
rightward-branching structure shown in (22).
(22)

S
NP
Paul

VP
V
m’ a

VP
VP
bouscul´
e

12

et

VP
pouss´ contre Marie
e

Of course, possible does not mean necessary; repeating the clitics and auxiliaries
is also perfectly good: Paul m’a bouscul´ et m’a pouss´ contre Marie. Such a sentence
e
e
would be analyzed as (maximal) VP conjunction in a way exactly parallel to the
examples in (19a,c).

16 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
The reasoning behind this conclusion is as follows. Under the verbal
complex analysis, a corresponding structure for the coordination of verbs
in simple tenses would presumably be as in (23a). These sentences are
ungrammatical (19b,d) but there seems to be no sensible way to make
structure (23a) ungrammatical while continuing to admit structure (21).
Any form of gapping or interpretation scheme that would allow a structure such as (21) would surely also admit the simpler structure shown
in (23a) but this is the wrong result. However, the ungrammaticality
of (19b,d) follows in a simple way if we assume a rightward-branching
phrase structure: in (22) the object clitic is higher up and necessarily has
scope over all conjuncts, whereas with a simple tense form, we have a
phrase structure as in (23b). Now, the clitic is inside one of the conjuncts
and so we expect this sentence to be bad because the subcategorization
requirements of the verb in the righthand conjunct have been violated.
(23) a.

*S
NP

VP

Paul

et

Cl

V

te

V

PP

poussera

VP

contre Marie

V
bousculera

b.

*S
NP
Paul

VP
VP
te bousculera

et

VP
poussera contre Marie

Bratt (1990, p. 41) tries to contest this test for constituency, suggesting that we could be dealing with non-constituent coordination (presumably roughly as in (21)), citing degraded acceptability when there are
non-parallel conjuncts, but the data do not seem to square with cases of
non-constituent coordination. In a paradigm case of non-constituent coordination, various ‘components’ can be repeated in the second conjunct
and the rest appear to be semantically reconstructed, as shown in (24).
(24) a. Paul gave the cassettes to Marie on Wednesday and the CDs on
Thursday.
b. Paul gave the cassettes to Marie on Wednesday and to Kim on
Thursday
c. Paul gave the cassettes to Marie on Wednesday and the CDs to
Kim on Thursday.

Romance is so complex / 17
We would thus predict that it should be possible to introduce a diﬀerent direct object into the second conjunct. But this is not the case: it
is necessary to gap arguments that are realized as clitics on the verbal
auxiliary in all conjuncts:
(25) a. Fr *Paul l’a frapp´ et mis sa soeur ` la porte
e
a
‘Paul struck him and threw his sister out.’
b.

*Je lui ai parl´ et ´crit ` sa femme
e
e
a
‘I spoke to him and wrote to his wife.’

Again this makes perfect sense if one adopts the rightward-branching
structure shown in (22). The clitic on the auxiliary must distribute over
both conjuncts; it cannot play a role in just one. Moreover, note that
this is not an allowed type of nonconstituent coordination in English.
Compare this example and its English translation:
(26) Fr Paul m’a bouscul´ et pouss´ contre Marie
e
e
‘Paul bumped into me and pushed me against Marie.’
Note how in the English translation, me must be repeated in each conjunct. If the second me is omitted, the meaning of the sentence is
completely changed: it cannot retain the same meaning via semantic
reconstruction.13
This section has concentrated on auxiliary verbs in French, but note
that similar conjunction facts hold for causatives and for restructuring
verbs (in other Romance languages). For example, embedded VPs can
be conjoined after faire in French (27a) and after restructuring verbs in
Spanish (27b–c).
13
Finally, it could be suggested that the verbal complex analysis could be maintained
and these conjunction facts correctly predicted, by raising clitics above the conjunction
and suggesting the structure shown in (i):

(i)

S
NP
Paul

VP
Cl

VP

m’

VP

et

V

VP
V

V

V

a

PP

pouss´
e

contre Marie

V
bouscul´
e

However, this proposal (i) produces strange non-parallel conjuncts (since the verbal
auxiliary avoir appears in only the ﬁrst conjunct), (ii) doesn’t account for the close relationship between clitics and the ﬁrst verbal element and (iii) still requires abandoning
the SUBCAT Principle (see Section 5.1).

18 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
(27) a. Fr Marie le fera lire ` Jean et d´chirer par Paul
a
e
‘Marie will make Jean read it and Paul tear it up.’
b. Sp Carlos me sigui´ topando y empujando contra Mar´
o
ıa
‘Carlos kept on bumping into me and pushing me against
Mar´
ıa.’
c.

Carlos me estaba tratando de topar y de empujar contra
Mar´
ıa
‘Carlos was trying to bump into me and push me against
Mar´
ıa.’

Note, here, that prepositional markers (e.g., de) are repeated on each
conjoined inﬁnitive. Under Miller’s analysis, this would be indicative of
these markers also being inﬂectional aﬃxes.14 Thus, from the above, it
seems that a rightward-branching phrase structure is correct in general
for all Romance complex predicates. We saw in the last section that this
phrase structure is problematic for LFG and HPSG analyses of complex
predicates under the assumption that the dependency between clitics and
the verb they are an argument of is a local one. In the next section, I will
present arguments that this assumption is correct.
4

Evidence for monoclausality

We have seen the problems that complex predicates cause for monostratal
theories of grammar, and we have seen that a proposed analysis using a
verbal complex is implausible. We have also already seen that one way
to move would be to assume that complex predicates are really multiclausal, and that things such as clitic climbing would then be explained
as long distance dependencies. This is the approach adopted in Miller
(1991). Miller handles French non-subject clitics via a foot feature and
does agreement using the Foot Feature Principle – the unbounded dependency construction of GPSG. Thus object clitics become a sort of long
distance agreement morphology.
However, it is here that we must part company with Miller because
there are a whole range of interrelated ‘transparency’ eﬀects that occur
with light verbs which indicate that this approach is wrong. The evidence I will consider draws a contrast between simplex clauses and ones
with complex predicates in them on the one hand, versus sentences with
embedded complements on the other hand. This distinction cannot be
suitably captured if we regard a complex predicate as just like any other
14

There are of course other conjunction facts to be considered, although it seems that
the class discussed here bear most directly on the phrase structure of Romance complex
predicates and other cases could reasonably be assimilated into the descriptive classes
of Right Node Raising and non-constituent coordination. However, I freely admit that
coordination is a diﬃcult subject on which the last word has yet to be written.

Romance is so complex / 19
case of an embedded clause except for the fact that there has been long
distance movement through it. So in this section I will argue that despite
the articulated rightward-branching phrase structure that was argued for
in the previous section, in a certain sense an entire complex predicate
is monoclausal not multiclausal, and hence clitics do not engage in long
distance movement.
4.1

Passive revisited

For example, consider again the ‘long passives’ seen earlier:
(28) a. Sp Los obreros est´n terminando de pintar estas paredes.
a
‘The workers are ﬁnishing painting these walls.’
b.

Estas paredes est´n siendo terminadas de pintar (por los
a
obreros).
‘These walls are being ﬁnished to paint (by the workers).’

An example like (28b) cannot possibly be explained as a lexical rule passivizing just one verb. Passive should not be able to apply to ﬁnish when
it is taking a verbal/sentential complement. One can passivize paint but
embedding this under ﬁnish is marginal in English (??The walls ﬁnished
being painted by the workers) and at any rate this is not what is happening here. The whole complex predicate is being passivized (as evidenced
by the passive auxiliary appearing before terminar). In these cases we
wish to say that there is some bounded domain in which passivization can
apply; normally that domain is the projection of a single verb, but with
these complex predicate constructions, that domain is larger: passivization can apply over an entire complex predicate. The tough-movement
data in Section 1 are further evidence for this position. It does not seem
that the use of long distance dependencies in the analysis would be very
insightful in explaining either of these phenomena.
4.2

Long Object Preposing

Similar results can be seen by looking at the phenomenon of Object
Preposing that occurs in conjunction with the impersonal si construction in Italian (Rizzi 1982).15 In fact, unlike ‘long’ passives which are
rather restricted (Aissen and Perlmutter 1983, p. 392), this phenomenon
is more generally applicable to all cases of restructuring.
One use of the ‘reﬂexive’ clitic si in Italian is as an impersonal subject
marker:
(29) a. It Non vi
si dorme volontieri
Not there si sleeps willingly
‘One doesn’t sleep willingly there.’
15
This construction is also known as the Reﬂexive Passive. Almost identical facts
obtain with se in Spanish. See Aissen and Perlmutter (1983, pp. 369–372).

20 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
b.

Si mangiano aragoste in primavera
si eat.pl
lobsters in spring
‘One eats lobsters in the spring.’

One might think that these sentences involve si ﬁlling the subject slot
and giving it the semantic content of a PROarb (unspeciﬁed ‘impersonal’
referent), but in cases like those in (30) where this construction is associated with Object Preposing (OP), such an analysis could not possibly
be maintained in either HPSG or LFG (or indeed even in ‘Classical’ GB:
the analysis of Burzio (1986, p. 48) violates the projection principle/theta
criterion by suggesting that both si and the preposed object spend some
time in the subject position).
(30) a. It si costruisce troppe
case in questa citt`.
a
si builds.sg too many houses in this
city
b.

troppe
case si costruiscono in questa citt`
a
too many houses si builds.pl
in this
city

In (30b), the ‘logical object’ appears before the verb, and verbal agreement (and the ability to undergo Raising and pro-drop: see Burzio 1986,
p. 46) suggests that it is occupying the subject position.16 If this is the
case, then we would expect OP to be clause-bound: the principles of
most current linguistic theories would prohibit the ‘logical object’ NP
from moving through or occupying a subject position that is getting a
thematic role from somewhere. (31b) shows that this is the case.
(31) a. It Si propende sempre a pagare le tasse il pi` tardi
u
si is inclined always to pay
taxes as late as
possibile.
possible
b.

*Le tasse si propendono sempre a pagare il pi` tardi
u
possibile.

If the fronted NP is occupying the subject position, it follows that the si
in (30b) can’t be a mere marker of an impersonal subject (like man in
German) but must indicate suppression of the highest theta role (along
the general lines of the passive, but always semantically binding it as a
PROarb rather than allowing realization via an adjunct).
Restructuring verbs, however, diverge markedly from this expected
pattern (Rizzi 1982, p. 16), appearing to allow ‘long’ OP into subject
position:
16

Note that the form in (30a) is somewhat of an idealization of the data, as for
many Italians this sentence is fairly bad with a singular verb form (see Burzio 1986,
footnote 31, p. 76). I accept Burzio’s analysis that the related sentences where there
is agreement with the ‘logical object’ but where this NP appears at the end of the
sentence follow from the general possibility of Subject Postposing in Italian.

Romance is so complex / 21
(32) a. It Queste case si vogliono vendere a
caro prezzo.
these houses si wants to sell at a high price
They want to sell these houses at a high price.
b.

I problemi principali si continuano a dimenticare
the problems main
si continues to forget
People continue to forget the main problems.

Rizzi furthermore goes on to show that these apparently anomalous ‘longdistance’ OP constructions appear in correlation with the usual properties
of ‘restructuring’ constructions, such as the inability to pied-pipe the
lower VP in cases of Wh-movement. Apparent long-distance OP can
require clitic-climbing, in the presence of appropriate clitics:
(33) a. It Si vuole vender-gli queste case a caro prezzo.
si wants sell-him these houses at a high price
b.

Gli si vuole vendere queste case a caro prezzo.

c.

*Queste case si vogliono vendergli a caro prezzo.

d.

Queste case gli si vogliono vendere a caro prezzo.

This provides quite strong evidence that the possibility of OP is a consequence of whatever is going on in ‘restructuring’ constructions that permits clitic climbing. It seems that we should thus seek a uniﬁed structural
explanation for all of these phenomena.
The OP phenomenon is seemingly unexplainable in a theory where
restructuring constructions are structurally akin to ordinary complement
constructions as whatever prevents a ‘logical object’ moving out of a complement VP should still apply. Within a version of GB that obeys the
Projection Principle, it is hard to reconcile with either use of a restructuring transformation, or with the idea of coanalysis.17 In the present
context, this phenomenon again shows the complex predicate acting as
a single unit, the logical subject (highest theta role) of which is being
suppressed. There seems to be no adequate way to capture this as an
operation aﬀecting just a single verb accompanied by a long distance
movement. If the impersonal subject clitic si aﬀected the lexical entry
of only the verb it was attached to, there would be no way to explain
the contrast between examples (32) and (31b). Again, argument structure changing operations that normally apply to a single verb all seem to
apply to a complete complex predicate.18
17

In coanalysis, both analyses should be good independently and hence combine together monotonically. For example, Di Sciullo and Williams (1987, p. 89) write “both
analyses of a coanalysis structure must be able to exist independently and meet whatever conditions analyses must meet in the language” (see also the discussion of similar
proposals of ‘covalency’ in Koster 1987, pp. 276ﬀ). But under normal assumptions,
the rightward-branching structure (corresponding to the upper tree in (10b)) should
be disallowed in cases of ‘long’ OP for the same reason that (31b) is disallowed.
18
Raposo and Uriagereka (1990) dispute the very foundations of this section suggest-

22 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
4.3

Adverb scope

Pollard and Sag (1987) suggested that adjuncts must appear within the
maximal projection of the lexical head which they modify, not embedded in any other maximal projection (except that relative clauses can be
structural sisters of the NPs they modify). Further thought has suggested
that this requirement is too severe, and that adjuncts can engage in long
distance dependencies. Examples like (34) have been known for a long
time, but attributed to the special properties of ‘bridge’ verbs like think
and believe (they also appear in parenthetical tags, etc.).
(34) a. How long ago do you believe that John left?
b. When do you think your husband is going to leave you?
However, one can also ﬁnd examples of long distance adjunct extraction
without using a bridge verb. I suggested (35a) and Pollard and Sag
(forthcoming) include the perhaps more natural sounding (35b):
(35) a. During my term as president of this university, I categorically
deny that there were any improper appropriations of federal
funds.
ing that the preposed ‘logical object’ is actually a topic rather than a subject. Their
argument runs roughly as follows: Burzio (1986, p. 52) notes that in Italian preposed
objects are incompatible with Control and gives a Case Theoretic argument as to why
this is so, but preposed objects are also incompatible with control in European Portugese and Burzio’s Case Theoretic argument breaks down there because Portugese has
inﬂected inﬁnitives from which nominative Case is available. Thus they suggest that
preposed objects are really in a topic position. Somewhat independently they suggest
that the violation of the Theta Criterion in Burzio’s analysis (both si and the preposed
object occupy the subject position at diﬀerent stages of the derivation) can be avoided
by the introduction of additional functional heads (Pollock 1989) as then one of these
elements can be in [Spec, TP] and the other in [Spec, AgrP]. However, there remain
certain unanswered questions regarding their analysis. Burzio (1986, p. 46) mentions
three subject properties of the preposed object: (i) it triggers agreement, (ii) it can
be raised, (iii) it can be pro-dropped. Raposo and Uriagereka (1990) show how the
ﬁrst one can be modeled in their proposal, but it would seem that the second would
be highly problematic: Raising should presumably apply to the Spec of the highest
functional projection below Comp (occupied by an empty element in a chain with se
in Raposo and Uriagereka’s analysis) and not to an adjoined topic. Further, analysis
as a topic would not explain the contrast in acceptability between examples (31b) and
(32). However, on the other side, Alessandro Zucchi suggested to me that he thought
the sentences in (32) did involve topicalized NPs and that he perceived little diﬀerence
in acceptability between examples like (31b) and those in (32). This contrast with the
judgements of Rizzi and Burzio suggests that there might be dialectal variation. Thus,
these data clearly deserve further attention, but for the moment, despite the fact that
Burzio’s account does not completely transfer to Portugese (for essentially the same
reason that all GB Case Theoretic arguments break down in Portugese), I will accept
Rizzi and Burzio’s data and analysis wherein the preposed ‘logical object’ is a surface
subject.

Romance is so complex / 23
b. With no tools but a crowbar and a ballpeen hammer, I’m not
very conﬁdent that Butch is going to be able to ﬁx that disk
drive.
These examples show that adjuncts need to be incorporated into a adequate theory of fronting and topicalization, but it is certainly not the
case that adjunct placement is free. In particular, I wish to maintain the
principle that an adjunct cannot modify a higher clause than the one that
it is embedded in:
(36) a. ?I’m conﬁdent that we will be highly able to solve this problem.
= ‘I’m highly conﬁdent that we will be able to solve this problem.’
b. I made him climb down without hesitating into the pit of vipers.
= ‘Without hesitating I made him climb down into the pit of
vipers.’
It is thus initially surprising with Romance causative and restructuring verbs that such modiﬁcation of the ‘main’ verb from ‘downstairs’ is
possible. The following examples are from Catalan (Alsina 1991 and p.c.):
(37) a. Ca He
fet
beure el vi
a contracor
a la Maria.
I have made drink the wine against x’s will to the Mary
‘I have made Mary drink the wine against her/my will.’
b.

Volia
tastar amb molt d’inter`s la cuina tailandesa
e
I wanted to taste with much interest the cuisine Thai
‘I wanted to taste Thai food with much interest’
(with with much interest most naturally modifying want)

Since there is no phrase-structural reason not to regard the embedded
complement as a VP, it thus seems that the phrase-structural notion
of ‘maximal projection’ is not the right way to capture adverb scope.
Rather, if we regard complex predicates as syntactically monoclausal,
that is, monoclausal at f-structure within LFG, the notion of ‘scoping
within a level of f-structure’ seems the right notion. For simple predicates this deﬁnition and the previous deﬁnition coincides, but this new
deﬁnition correctly groups simple clauses and complex predicate clauses
together against multiclausal sentences. The prediction is that an adverb
appearing inside a complex predicate will be able to modify any semantically appropriate verb (or more accurately, relation) within the complex
predicate, and this seems to be correct.19
19

Alex Alsina (p.c.) supplied me with some further Catalan judgements that support this position. It is a well-known fact that ‘restructuring’ cannot occur when the
embedded clause is negated. Thus while we can form a complex predicate that allows
clitic climbing in the usual way as in (i):

24 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
4.4

Word order in causatives

Work within the GB tradition has generally assumed that in causatives,
the causee argument (lower ‘subject’) is attached higher than the remaining arguments of the embedded verb, in a speciﬁer position. Depending
on the particular approach, this may be deemed the Spec of any of VP, IP,
CP or perhaps one of the newer functional projections, but at any rate,
there is an asymmetry between the causee argument and the remaining
arguments of the embedded verb of the general form shown in (38). The
claim is that surrounding the lower verb there is a full clausal structure.

(38) a. Fr Pierre fait ´couter Jean ` Marie
e
a
‘Pierre makes Marie listen to Jean.’

(i) Ca

L’he volgut entendre.
‘I have wanted to understand it.’

if the embedded verb is negated, it must be in a normal verbal complement and hence
clitic climbing is impossible as is shown in (ii):
(ii) Ca

*L’he volgut no entendre.
‘I have wanted to not understand it.’

We thus predict that an adverb embedded in the complement clause should be able
to take wide scope (scope over the higher verb) in (i) but not in (ii), and that indeed
seems to be the case, as is shown by using the adverbial phrase moltes vegades ‘many
times’ which is here only semantically compatible with modifying volgut ‘wanted’:

(iii) Ca

He volgut entendre moltes vegades aquest problema.
‘I have wanted to understand this problem many times.’

(iv) Ca

*L’he volgut no entendre moltes vegades.

The sentence (v) with the adverbial phrase at the end is much better, but in this case
we can regard the adverb as being a sister of the higher verb.
(v) Ca

?He volgut no entendre aquest problema moltes vegades.
‘I have wanted to not understand this problem many times.’

While negating an inﬁnitive is apparently never particularly felicitous in Catalan, the
contrasts between (iii) and (iv) and (iv) and (v) support the hypothesis advanced in the
text. Incidentally note that an adverb embedded in the lower clause can apparently
take wide scope regardless of whether clitics climb or not. This would support the
position of Moore (1990) that clitic climbing is basically always optional in cases of
restructuring, but we will not explore the ramiﬁcations of this fact here.

Romance is so complex / 25
b.

IP
NP
Pierre

I
VP

I
faiti

V

VP
V

ti

NP

V

NP

´couter
e

a Marie
`

Jean

Miller (1991) and Alsina (1991) have argued from French and Catalan
respectively that this higher attachment of the causee cannot be correct
and hence that the causee should not be represented (at a level like Dstructure) as a phrase structure subject (A-speciﬁer). Looking at the
surface form there are obvious reasons for not representing the causee
as a subject: where morphological markings are available (with cliticized
pronominal objects or with indirect objects), the causee clearly surfaces
as a direct or indirect object (depending on the transitivity of the lower
verb. An argument for not representing the causee as even a D-structure
subject comes from the inability of such a theory to felicitously account
for the word ordering of the causee. The argument of Miller and Alsina
goes as follows: with intransitive and simple transitive embedded verbs,
the causee follows the other arguments, as predicted by the above structure, but that result follows independently, anyway (in the intransitive
case there are no other complements, and in the transitive case the ‘indirect object’ causee follows the direct object because full NP indirect
objects always follow direct objects in Romance languages. Thus the result follows trivially or by independently needed linear precedence rules
and the above structure explains nothing. However, if we look at verbs
that subcategorize for (i.e., require) a PP complement, we see the following:
(39) a. Ca L’estora, la farem
posar sota la taula a la
the rug it we shall make put under the table to the
Maria.
Mary
b.

L’estora, la farem
posar a la Maria sota la
the rug it we shall make put to the Mary under the
taula.
table
‘The rug, we shall make Mary put it under the table.’

26 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
c.

Aquest Van Gogh, el farem
comparar amb un
this
Van Gogh it we shall make compare with a
Gauguin a la Maria.
Gauguin to the Mary

d.

Aquest Van Gogh, el farem
comparar a la
this
Van Gogh it we shall make compare to the
Maria amb un Gauguin.
Mary with a Gauguin
‘This Van Gogh, we shall make Mary compare it to a
Gauguin.’

e.

Farem
creure /conﬁar la Maria en
we shall make believe/rely
the Mary on/in
l’atzar.
the chance

f.

??Farem
creure /conﬁar en
l’atzar
la
we shall make believe/rely
on/in the chance the
Maria.
Mary
‘We shall make Mary believe in/rely on chance.’

The pattern is clear – with a transitive embedded verb, the causee can
appear freely ordered with other PP complements, whereas with a verb
that only subcategorizes for a PP complement, the direct object causee
must precede the PP complement. These facts immediately fall out from
independently required linear precedence constraints if the causee is represented as a sister of the embedded V. However, if the sort of asymmetrical ‘causee-as-subject’ structure mentioned above is used, some sort of
extraneous ﬁxup must be done: Rosen (1989) suggests PP extraposition
(right adjunction).20 It seems, then that a structure like the following
should be the null hypothesis, and we adopt it here.
(40)

S
NP
Pierre

VP
V
fait

VP
NP

NP

´couter
e
20

V

Jean

a Marie
`

See further Alsina (1991) who argues that this adjunction cannot be forced by
Case Theory and Miller (1991, pp. 238–239) who argues that Heavy NP Shift data are
also best explained by generating the causee among the complements of the lower verb
rather than in a higher speciﬁer position.

Romance is so complex / 27
4.5

Auxiliary selection in Italian

The basic facts about the alternation of the perfective auxiliary in Italian
between avere ‘have’ and essere ‘be’ are well known (see Rizzi 1982 and
especially Burzio 1986). It will be suﬃcient for present purposes to know
that essere is used with unaccusative verbs, giving basic facts such as
these:
(41) a. It Piero ha/*` mangiato con noi
e
‘Piero has/*‘is’ eaten with us.’
b.

Piero ha/*` voluto questo libro
e
‘Piero has/*‘is’ wanted this book.’

c.

Piero *ha/` venuto con noi
e
‘Piero *has/‘is’ come with us.’

The facts of present interest are what happens when a restructuring verb
that takes avere as its auxiliary, like volere in (41b), takes a verbal
complement:
(42) a. It Piero ha/*` voluto mangiare con noi
e
‘Piero has/*‘is’ wanted to eat with us.’
b.

Piero ha/` voluto venire con noi
e
‘Piero has/‘is’ wanted to come with us.’

Avere is always good, but if the downstairs verb would normally take
essere, then essere is also possible.21 Importantly, it seems that essere is necessarily used as the auxiliary when restructuring has occurred
(and not otherwise).22 For example, VP pied-piping accompanying Whmovement, which prevents complex predicate formation prevents the auxiliary change (43a) and clitic climbing is impossible without the auxiliary
change having occurred (43b).
(43) a.

It La casa paterna, tornare
alla quale Maria
the house paternal return.inf to the which Maria


voluto 
 avrebbe




 have.cond wanted 


gi`
a
da molto tempo, . . .
*sarebbe voluta  already since much time










‘be’.cond wanted
‘Her paternal home, to which Maria would have wanted
to go back for a long time, . . . ’

21

Restructuring verbs that take essere as an auxiliary always maintain this auxiliary.
I will not further discuss them in this section, but their existence in no way undermines
the point that is being made.
22
Recall that restructuring is optional with these modal and aspectual verbs in
Italian.

28 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
b.

*?Maria ci ha dovuto venire molte volte
‘Maria has had to come there many times.’

We thus have the result that in cases of restructuring, it is the righthand verb that is determining whether the auxiliary is avere or essere.
This result seems completely general. Rizzi (1982, p. 22–23) demonstrates
that in cases with complex predicates, no matter how many restructuring
verbs occur between the auxiliary and the rightmost verb, it is still the
rightmost verb that determines auxiliary selection:23
(44) a. It Maria li avrebbe voluti andare a prendere lei stessa
[avere] [essere] [avere]
‘Maria would have (avere) wanted to go to get them herself.’
b.

Maria ci sarebbe dovuta cominciare ad andare
[avere] [avere]
[essere]
‘Maria would have (essere) had to begin to go there.’

c.

Maria li avrebbe potuti stare per andare a prendere
[essere] [avere]
[avere] [essere]
lei stessa
‘Maria would have been able to be on the point of going to
get them herself.’

So, again we are faced with a choice. If we regard restructuring verbs
as normal complement taking verbs, then auxiliary selection clearly cannot be via a local dependency. It is presumably possible to implement
some technical solution that would work, such as introducing yet another
ad hoc feature which would be passed up by something like the Foot Feature Principle (noting that we would have to be careful that this feature is
introduced only by the bottom verb and not by intermediate restructuring verbs), but this would be yet another stipulation, and I think further
indicates that there is something wrong with this whole approach.
The correct way of looking at things again seems to be to say that a
complex predicate occupies a single level of f-structure. Within this level,
the restructuring verbs are acting basically like auxiliary verbs (and are
often described as such in Italian textbooks); for example, their semantic
content seems bleached so that their meaning is more similar to that of
a modal or aspectual morpheme in other languages. If we look at things
thus, it is quite natural that auxiliary choice is being decided by the ‘main
verb’, that is, the righthand verb. A method for correctly generating
the results of this light verb argument combination will be suggested
later. For further similar evidence for a monoclausal analysis within a
23
The auxiliaries that verbs would normally select are shown beneath them in these
examples. Note that each example has a climbed clitic proving that restructuring has
taken place and the auxiliary shown is in each case the only choice possible.

Romance is so complex / 29
Relational Grammar framework, see Rosen (1990) (which additionally
examines participial agreement and participial absolutes).24
4.6

Summary

The story has developed like this: if we adopt the idea of analyzing
clitic climbing as a long distance movement operation, we ﬁnd that there
are all sorts of other features and phrases which we would also have
to analyze as engaging in long distance dependencies. This would not
only force us to postulate a menagerie of new features, but we would
be suggesting that it is merely chance that all of these long distance
dependencies happen to be allowed in the presence of restructuring and
causative/permissive verbs. But this is surely not the case. Rather it
seems that we want to propose a structural diﬀerence between complex
predicate clauses and simple clauses on the one hand and sentences with
ordinary embedded VP complements on the other hand. In particular, as
many of these phenomena seem to be local argument structure (valence)
changing processes, I suggest that the ﬁrst group should be identiﬁed as
sentences that are syntactically monoclausal. In this way we can hope to
explain why the periphrastic causatives of Romance behave similarly to
the lexical causatives of languages such as Turkish or Chichewa (Alsina
ˆ
in preparation).
5

The consequences of monoclausality

However, if we adopt a (syntactically) monoclausal analysis of complex
predicates, then we have to adapt our theory in other ways. For then we
have monoclausal structures containing multiple argument taking predicates (i.e., verbs, predicative adjectives and so on). While this decision seems to explain a diverse group of phenomena fairly well, it also
has a price, and we have to introduce new machinery to complete our
new model. In this section, we will ﬁrst show the problems that the
rightward-branching phrase structure presents for an HPSG analysis and
then outline various other problems caused by postulating monoclausal
but multiword complex predicates.
5.1

Ramiﬁcations for HPSG

The untenability of the verbal complex analysis (Section 3) has important ramiﬁcations for the theory of HPSG (Pollard and Sag 1987, forthcoming). One way to analyze clitic-climbing in HPSG would be as an
unbounded dependency construction (UDC), but, given the arguments
24

This intuition of ‘monoclausal at f-structure’ is also how we plan to capture the idea
that simple tenses and compound tenses formed with auxiliaries are in many ways not
that diﬀerent. Although compound tenses have a more articulated phrase structure,
as was shown above, at f-structure they are monoclausal, just like simple tense forms.

30 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
in Section 4 that analyzing clitic-climbing as involving a long distance
dependency is implausible, the dependency between clitics and the verb
they are an argument of must be local. However, if this is the case, then
the only way to maintain HPSG’s SUBCAT principle in such sentences
is to propose a verbal complex.25 Given that this approach was shown
above to be wrong, I will conclude that the SUBCAT Principle must be
modiﬁed. Let us work through why this is the case.26
The central property of HPSG that we are concerned with is the
SUBCAT principle which determines how immediate dominance constituency
relates to subcategorization. It can be paraphrased as follows:
The SUBCAT principle maintains that more oblique things
on the SUBCAT list must be discharged before less oblique
things, although multiple daughters can be discharged simultaneously.
The SUBCAT principle is a strong universal claim that limits the possible
phrase structure conﬁgurations of a head and its subcategorized arguments (stronger than the global completeness and coherence requirements
of LFG), but in this section I will argue that it is overly strong because
it cannot account for the Romance data we have been considering.
An additional complicating factor in HPSG is the phonological realization of a sign. In theory, HPSG allows an arbitrary relationship between
the phonologies of the daughters of a sign and that of its mother. In
practice this ﬂexibility has been little exploited. The English grammar
proposed in Pollard and Sag (forthcoming) uses only concatenation as a
phonological operation (so that HPSG trees have much the same interpretation as those in mainstream generative grammar). In particular the
head-wrapping analyses of Pollard (1984) have been abandoned.27 Initially I will show how the argument holds under the additional assumption
25

And such an HPSG analysis was adopted by Bratt (1990).
This section assumes that clitics are subcategorized elements rather than just
agreement markers (see the discussion in footnote 9). If one is assuming a SUBCAT list based theory of agreement that obeys Keenan’s Principle (that agreement
morphology may appear on an item A, indicating agreement of A with an item B,
only if the semantic translation of A is a functor of which the translation of B is an
argument), then the results of this section hold unchanged. Another approach is to
have subcategorization satisﬁed by empty elements (essentially equivalent to GB’s pro),
and for the features of these empty elements to be passed up the tree to where the
agreeing clitics are found. But this necessitates introducing new features that ‘store’
information about these empty elements, and thus becomes essentially identical to the
long-distance dependency approach to clitic-climbing explored in Miller (1991). While
the proposal remains to be worked out in detail, these similarities suggest that the
points raised in Section 4 would argue against this variant as well.
27
The daughters of an HPSG phrasal sign are merely a list of signs which the mother
immediately dominates (hence each daughter is referred to as an immediate dominance
constituent). There is no claim that these daughters are ordered or even contiguous in
the phonological realization of a sentence. One example of a postulated operation that
makes phrasal signs discontinuous in their phonological realization is head-wrapping.
‘Head-wrapping’ refers to a family of operations for combining the phonologies of con26

Romance is so complex / 31
of concatenation as the only means of joining the PHONOLOGY of daughters, but towards the end I will show that the conjunction facts mentioned
above suggest that the argument is valid even if another phonological
operation is assumed (the most plausible of which is a head-wrapping
operation).
To see how adoption of the SUBCAT Principle forces a certain phrase
structure, consider the two French sentences:
(45) a. Fr Je vous ai apport´ des bonbons
e
‘I brought you some sweets.’
b.

Je l’ai apport´ ` Christophe
ea
‘I brought it to Christophe.’

In (45a) the clitic is the Indirect Object while the ﬁnal NP is the Direct
Object, while in (45b) the conﬁgurations are reversed. Consider then the
putative constituents:
Vx

(46) a.

Vx

b.

V

NP

V

PP

apport´
e

des bonbons

apport´
e

a Pierre
`

One of these, (46a), could only be created by discharging an element
from the SUBCAT list (the Direct Object) while a more oblique term
(the Indirect Object) remained on the SUBCAT list. Hence if we are to
maintain the SUBCAT principle, it follows immediately that the things in
(46) are not immediate dominance constituents of the sentences in (45).
Consider further the two sentences:
(47) a. Fr Tu me
donneras des bonbons
You me.dat will.give candy
‘You will give me sweets.’
b.

Tu le
donneras ` Pierre
a
You it.acc will.give to Pierre
‘You will give it to Pierre.’

and the putative constituents:
Vx

(48) a.

Vx

b.

Cl

V

Cl

V

me

donneras

le

donneras

stituents in which one daughter is positioned relative to the head of the other daughter,
which may mean that it is positioned in the middle of its phonological string, thus violating the ‘no crossing lines’ constraint that many assume for syntactic trees. For example, using head-wrapping we can suggest that the immediate dominance constituents
of the sentence Can he come? are he and can come, and that the phonology of the
mother is generated by placing he to the right of the head of the other constituent,
which is can.

32 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
By exactly the same reasoning, one of these, (48b), cannot be a constituent either or again the SUBCAT principle would be violated. Indeed, further consideration of the SUBCAT principle should convince one
that both the pre-verbal clitics and the post-verbal complements on the
SUBCAT list of a verb must be discharged at the same time, and thus the
immediate dominance structure of the sentences in (47) must be of the
form shown in (49):28
(49)

VP
Cl

V

NP

me

donneras

des bonbons

What then of the examples in (45) where there was a verbal auxiliary? One option would be to form an immediate dominance constituent
as above, and then have this form an immediate dominance constituent
with the auxiliary (avoir), but for the phonological realization of this
structure to be ‘head-wrapped’ so that the form of avoir appears immediately before the verb (in the formalism of Pollard (1984) this would be
the operation RR1). We will consider this option below, but for the moment, let us presume that we are dealing simply with the concatenation
of phonologies. Then this option is no longer open to us, and so we must
suggest that the immediate dominance structure of the whole VP is as in
(50). That is, we must propose the sort of verbal complex that we have
argued above to be untenable.
(50)

VP
Cl
vous

Vx

NP
des bonbons

This leaves us looking for a suitable structure for the intervening verbal
elements. The details are not vitally important to the arguments we will
make here, but Bratt (1990) adopts a rightward-branching structure for
the verbal complex, so that the structure of sentence (51a) is as shown in
(51b):
(51) a. Fr Nous l’
avons fait laver ` Marie
a
We it.acc have made wash to Marie
‘We have made Marie wash it.’
28
The only other move one could make would be to suggest that pairs such as (47a)
and (47b) have radically diﬀerent phrase structures, but this position seems both unmotivated and untenable. Note in particular that ﬁrst and second person clitics always
precede third person clitics, so that an attempt to propose a constituency of Tu [[me
donneras] les bonbons] and Tu [le [donneras ` Pierre]] could not be extended to Tu
a
me le donneras (without head-wrapping).

Romance is so complex / 33
b.

S
NP
Nous

VP
Cl
l’

PP

V
V

V

a Marie
`

V

V

fait

avons

V
laver

So that the upper V , headed by avons can subcategorize for arguments
of the lower verb, Bratt uses an HPSG implementation of what is essentially function composition so that avons inherits the lower verb’s
arguments. To constrain function composition to verb forms that have
yet to discharge any of their arguments (so that the above phrase structure is the only one permitted) Bratt employs a covert system of bar
levels (the features ±LEX and ±PHRAS).
In addition to the problems already mentioned for the verbal complex approach, note a further problem here concerning subject clitics. In
Bratt’s analysis, the subject clitics appear in the position of full NP subjects licensed by the same Schema 1 used for English subjects (Pollard and
Sag forthcoming). However, this cannot possibly be the whole story, as
recall that subject clitics can be inverted in questions (and imperatives),
breaking up the supposed verbal complex:
(52) a. Fr Fera-t-il
partir Marie?
will.make-he to.leave Marie
‘Will he make Marie leave?’
b.

Vous a-t-elle d´ja ´t´ pr´sent´e?
e ee e
e
‘Has she already been introduced to you?’

Again, one might initially think that these examples could be made some
sense of by copying Pollard’s (1984) analysis of English subject-verb inversion as an instance of head-wrapping (operation RL2), but clearly the ﬂat
structure proposed for subject-verb inversion (Schema 3) in Pollard and
Sag (1987, forthcoming) neither allows clitic climbing nor integrates with
the verbal complex analysis outlined above. In contrast, Miller (1991)
regards subject clitics as inﬂectional morphology too. The analysis here
is somewhat less clear as subject clitics have traditionally been regarded
as allowing wide scope over conjunctions. However, Miller suggests this is
not really true of modern colloquial French, but only of written registers.29
29
Thus it is normally asserted that the subject clitic can have wide scope in a sentence
like Je frappai et entrai ‘I knocked and entered’, but Miller argues that this sounds

34 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Does the use of head-wrapping allow us to maintain the SUBCAT
principle? I conjecture that the answer is no. I will not prove that no use
of diﬀerent PHONOLOGY-combining operations gives the right results,
but I will show that head-wrapping in auxiliaries (or restructuring verbs)
is not a possible analysis. The outline of such an analysis would be as
follows: in compound tenses, the main verb would take its (non-subject)
dependents all at once, and then this constituent would combine with the
auxiliary which would be head-wrapped in by Pollard’s (1984) operation
RR1, giving an immediate dominance tree like this:
(53)

VP
Aux

VP

ai

Cl

V

NP

vous

apport´
e

des bonbons

but a phonological realization in which ai appeared to the left of the head
of the righthand top-level constituent (apport´).
e
First note that this analysis has done nothing to explain the close
bonds we noted above between clitics and the ﬁrst verbal element. One
could try and argue that those facts could be dealt with separately under a
theory of prosody (although it would be hard), so perhaps more tellingly
note how this proposal comes a cropper in the face of the conjunction
facts. Consider how we would deal with head-wrapping into the following
VP:
(54)

VP
VP

et

VP

Cl

V

Cl

V

PP

me

bouscul´
e

me

pouss´
e

contre Marie

In a coordinate structure, head-wrapping should presumably apply across
the board;30 at any rate, not doing this and putting an auxiliary into just
one conjunct would give an illegitimate sentence, for example *Paul m’a
bouscul´ et me pouss´ contre Marie. Applying head-wrapping across the
e
e
much worse in the present (Je frappe et entre) than in the ‘literary’ pass´ simple and
e
that in normal conversational contexts one always repeats the clitic and says Je frappe
et j’entre, even in a narrative usage. In this and other respects French subject clitics
diﬀer from the subject pronominals of Spanish and Italian (Jaeggli 1982, pp. 90–92)
and Old French (Miller 1991, p. 220) which appear to be true pronouns. See Miller
(1991, p. 158ﬀ) for further discussion.
30
A brief perusal suggests that there is no discussion of how to handle coordination
in Pollard (1984).

Romance is so complex / 35
board would give us the following perfectly legitimate sentence (which we
have analyzed as resulting from (maximal) VP conjunction):
(55)

Paul m’a bouscul´ et m’a pouss´ contre Marie.
e
e

There is no problem with that, the problem is that there seems to be
no possibility of generating the other grammatical variant with lower VP
coordination:
(56)

Paul m’a bouscul´ et pouss´ contre Marie.
e
e

Under an analysis in which auxiliaries were head-wrapped in, this would
require the implausible operation of head-wrapping into the leftmost conjunct while simultaneously gapping clitics in the righthand conjunct(s).
But deletion transformations are not permitted in HPSG. Thus I conclude
that use of head-wrapping does not provide a straightforward solution to
the problems presented here.
5.2

Lexical rules must be abandoned

If, as we have seen, Passive can apply not just to a single word, but
an entire complex predicate, then Passive can no longer be regarded as
a lexical rule. Indeed, lexical rules in general must be reinterpreted as
operations manipulating the argument structure and mapping to grammatical functions of an arbitrary (simple or complex) predicate. These
ideas have been developed in LFG (Bresnan 1990, Alsina 1991) where the
lexical rules of ‘Classical’ LFG (Bresnan 1982b) have been replaced by the
Lexical Mapping Theory (LMT). However, it is as yet unclear whether
a truly satisfactory theory has been worked out of how the LMT applies
over multiple words in a complex predicate (see Andrews and Manning
(in progress) for one attempt).
Considering this issue, we might recall the well known cases of English
passives appearing to involve the promotion of something other than a
direct object:
(57) a. Everything is being paid for by the company.
b. John was taken advantage of by the lawyer.
c. This bed was slept in by George Washington.
d. That barn has been gotten drunk down in back of more than
anywhere else in the county.
Such phenomena are extensively discussed in Bresnan (1982b, pp. 50–
59). There it is suggested that the preposition/particle (or adverb etc.)
incorporates with the V forming a single lexical item. Such an analysis
is plausible because, as Bresnan shows, in English nothing can appear

36 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
between the incorporated item and the verb (this contrasts markedly
with the facts in the case of Romance complex predicate formation, as
was shown above).
Nevertheless, it seems in retrospect that we might want to incorporate
these cases into a general theory of predicate combination, in which the
resulting complex predicates are subject to subsequent valence changing
operations like Passive or Applicative. The required adjacency of the
incorporated element and the preposition in English would then become
an English-speciﬁc fact. In a movement-free theory of grammar, such a
requirement cannot possibly be maintained in general, for, as is shown
in Koster (1975), the same sort of verb plus preposition/particle complex
predicates occur in Dutch and there, within a tensed clause, the verb is
regularly separated from the particle.
5.3

The LFG notion of projections must be modiﬁed

The conclusion that we can have more than one semantic relation (i.e.,
predicator taking arguments) within something that we wish to regard
syntactically as a single clause, is problematic for the LFG approach of
codescription of language using various levels related via correspondence
functions (as described most clearly in Kaplan 1987 and Halvorsen and
Kaplan 1988, though the notion of correspondences was introduced in
Kaplan and Bresnan 1982). In these works it is suggested that the functional structure (f-structure) and the semantic σ-structure are separate
levels of representation that are related to the surface constituent structure (c-structure) by correspondence functions oﬀ the c-structure named
φ and σ respectively. I will indicate why this approach must be modiﬁed
by showing the problems it creates for the version of LFG described in
Halvorsen and Kaplan (1988) (which was adopted for modeling complex
predicates by Butt et al. 1991), where both the f-structure and the semantic σ-structure are projected oﬀ the surface c-structure, though actually
the same problems obtain for any possible projection architecture (Dalrymple et al. 1992).31 This argument is initially due to John Maxwell.
If f-structure and σ-structure are both projections oﬀ c-structure, relations between the two have to be described by using composite functions
through c-structure nodes, namely φ = σ −1 ◦ φ and σ = φ−1 ◦ σ (as
in Halvorsen and Kaplan (1988) or Butt et al. (1991)). However, because of the way that various c-structure nodes map onto a single node
of the f-structure, the attempt to use these composite functions leads to
diﬃculties.32 For consider what happens if we embed a complex predicate
31
Ceteris paribus. There are proposals (such as using functional uncertainty in the
semantics to allow a more indirect relation between syntax and semantics) that might
allow the continued use of a projection architecture, but such innovations were not
assumed in the works cited earlier and it is unclear whether the perfect solution has
yet been found. Again, see Dalrymple et al. (1992) for further discussion.
32
The use of the word ‘function’ above is loose – since the correspondence functions

Romance is so complex / 37
as the sentential complement of another verb, such as dubitare ‘doubt’:
(58) It Dubitiamo che egli possa venire domani
‘I doubt that he can come tomorrow.’
We would want to do this via a c-structure rule of the general form:
(59) VP

→

V

S

↑=↓

(↑COMP) = ↓

and specify the relation between the syntax and the semantics of the
matrix verb lexically via a rule on the verb such as:33
(60) dubitiamo

doubt

(↑σ ARG2) = (↑φ COMP)φ−1 σ

Here we are using the modern notation for writing projections in LFG,
where they appear as subscripts rather than preﬁxed functions. The
meaning is function application but this notation allows functional equations to be read simply from left-to-right, which is more intuitive. The
equation says that the ARG2 of the matrix verb doubt is the σ-structure
of the c-structure node(s) that produced the COMP. But, unfortunately,
if we have a complex predicate (which in LFG terms is something which
is ‘multiclausal’ at σ-structure but ‘monoclausal’ at f-structure), then two
or more c-structure nodes which have diﬀerent σ-structures contributed
to the COMP (a restructuring or causative predicate and the lower verb
have the same f-structure correspondent but diﬀerent σ-structure correspondents). This is shown in (61).
are neither one-to-one or onto, their inverses are in general not functions at all but
relations, and this is actually the source of our troubles. Halvorsen and Kaplan (1988)
tried to make sense of what happened when a correspondence was applied to a set
of nodes, suggesting that the result was the generalization of the values obtained by
applying the correspondence to each member of the set, but that notion clearly is of
no value here.
33
We would not wish to mention a semantic argument attribute, such as ARG2,
in the phrase structure rule, because then the correspondence between ARG2 and a
certain phrase structural position would be ﬁxed, whereas we want it to be able to
vary according to the verb, that is, to have the relationship mediated by grammatical
relations in the usual way. For example, the COMP may sometimes be the ARG2 and
sometimes the ARG3, as can be seen by comparing the sentences I believe that Bush
will be re-elected and I persuaded him that the Iraqis are evil . (Note that here the
semantic structure is representing a conventional semantic form such as doubt(x, y)
by the attribute value matrix shown in (i), much as is done within the CONTENT of
an HPSG sign.)
(i)



REL


ARG1
ARG2



doubt
x
y




38 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
(61)



rel



arg1 rel proi



σ-s: 

rel come




arg1 —
event 


S
NP
egli

VP
V
possa

can

















mod tomorrow

VP
V

Adv

venire domani


...



...




pred


f-s: 


subj
comp 




‘can-come’
pred ‘pro’














adjunct “tomorrow”

From the COMP’s value, φ−1 takes one back to both the S and the VP
nodes (as noted φ−1 is not a function). Unfortunately, the σ correspondence of these nodes is diﬀerent, being the outer and inner clauses of the
depicted σ-structure. Clearly, the desired semantic value of the COMP
is that of the whole complex predicate, that is the value of the outer σstructure shown above, but this approach does not allow us to get to it
uniquely. And an approach that tried to project f-structure oﬀ σ-structure
suﬀers from similar problems.
There are various ways that one could think about rectifying this
problem (several are mentioned in Dalrymple et al. 1992), but perhaps the
simplest is to abandon the LFG conception of separate projections related
by correspondence functions and instead use a uniﬁed feature structure
of the sort that has been proposed in HPSG (Pollard and Sag 1987).
Such a uniﬁed feature structure is explored in Andrews and Manning (in
progress).
5.4

A new form of control is needed (argument fusion)

To be able to handle multiple argument taking verbs within a syntactically monoclausal structure, new subtheories are needed. A case in point
is controlled complements. Consider a complex predicate with a meaning
such as want to go. When such a meaning is expressed by a true VPcomplement structure (as happens in English), the subject of want and go
are the same. In LFG this is modeled by the Lexical Rule of Functional
Control (Bresnan 1982a, p. 322), which in this case adds the annotation
(↑XCOMP SUBJ) = (↑SUBJ) to the lexical entry of want. HPSG uses a
similar mechanism so that the lexical entries of complement taking verbs
end up equating one of their arguments with the undischarged subject of

Romance is so complex / 39
the complement verb. These methods are syntactic methods that rely on
want and go, above, each appearing in a separate clause (syntactically).
However, if we now conclude that want and go are within the same syntactic clause, then another mechanism must be introduced. If we accept
that complex predicates are still semantically multiclausal then the most
likely candidate is a sort of fusion of the argument structures of the two
verbs.
To illustrate the idea, and to move this paper onto a more positive
note within its dying pages, I will present a proposal for the sort of argument fusion that is needed to handle restructuring verbs (causative
verbs require a somewhat diﬀerent treatment and will not be considered
here). In particular I wish to provide an account that will deal naturally
with the auxiliary selection facts in Italian that we saw earlier. The idea
that I wish to develop is that although want is clearly a binary predicate
semantically, want(wanter, wanted), the lexical entry for volere ‘want’
in Italian, when acting as a restructuring verb, only projects one of its
arguments, the one corresponding to the desired situation. We will call
this argument its ARG*, as that is the notation I will use for an argument
that fuses with another relation during complex predicate formation. The
result of this is that the only nominal arguments projected into the argument structure will be those of the ﬁnal heavy verb. In this way we
can capture Picallo’s (1990) intuition that in restructuring constructions
the heavy verb is really the main verb and hence determines subcategorization. So, for example, light verb volere and heavy verb venire
‘come’ will have the following (partial) lexical entries (where we use ˆ to
represent the highest argument of a verb on the thematic hierarchy, as in
Bresnan and Kanerva 1989):
 

(62) a. volere

want



REL



want(—, —)




ˆ

ARG*

come




 

b. venire

—





REL

come(—)

ARGtheme

—



If these two verbs combine as a complex predicate, the heavy verb (62b)
will merge with the ARG* of the light verb and this will then identify
the ˆ of the light verb with the ARGtheme of the heavy verb, yielding the
following argument structure:
 

(63)



REL





ARG*



want(—, —)



REL
ARGtheme




come(—) 

—



40 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Continuing with the simpliﬁcation that only unaccusative verbs take
essere as an auxiliary, it is then suﬃcient to propose that the auxiliary
is essere if and only if the highest argument (on the thematic hierarchy)
of the whole complex predicate is a theme. This will be seen to correctly
predict the auxiliary choice for sentences (64a) and (64c) (in (64b) the
highest argument to be linked is an agent and so the auxiliary is avere,
while in (64d), the highest argument to be linked is the theme and so the
auxiliary is essere).
(64) a. Maria li avrebbe voluti andare a prendere lei stessa
[avere] [essere] [avere]
‘Maria would have (avere) wanted to go to get them herself.’
b.



REL











ARG*









past.conditional(—)


REL









ARG*





want(—, —)


REL






ARG*





go-to-do(—, —)


REL



ARGagent


ARGtheme




get(—, —) 



—



—



















c. Maria ci sarebbe dovuta cominciare ad andare
[avere] [avere]
[essere]
‘Maria would have (essere) had to begin to go there.’
d.



REL











ARG*







6



past.conditional(—)


REL









ARG*





obligation(—, —)


REL






ARG*



begin(—, —)


REL



ARGtheme


ARGloc






go(—, —) 



—

—





















Conclusion

And that’s where we’ll end this little saunter through Romance complex
predicates. Clearly this has been more of an examination of the problems
than a worked out solution to them. But still it seems that considerable
progress has been made. We have conﬁrmed that the conventionally assumed rightward-branching phrase structure for Romance complex predicates is correct, and we have seen much evidence motivating a notion of

Romance is so complex / 41
monoclausality to explain how a complex predicate behaves like a simple
predicate. Using these conﬂicting requirements we have identiﬁed whole
classes of solutions that are deﬁnitely wrong and changes that will have to
be made to both HPSG and LFG before a satisfactory theory of complex
predicates can be constructed within those frameworks.

42 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Bibliography
Aissen, J. L. 1979. The Structure of Causative Constructions. New York:
Garland Publishing.
Aissen, J. L., and D. M. Perlmutter. 1983. Clause reduction in Spanish.
In D. M. Perlmutter (Ed.), Studies in Relational Grammar 1, 360–
403. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. [Earlier version published
in 1976].
Alsina, A. 1991. The monoclausality of causatives: Evidence from Romance. ms, Stanford University.
Alsina, A. in preparation. Predicate Composition: A Theory of Syntactic
Function Alternations. PhD thesis, Stanford.
Andrews, A. D., and C. D. Manning. in progress. Information spreading
and levels of representation in LFG. ms, Australian National University and Stanford University.
Authier, J.-M., and L. Reed. 1992. Case theory, theta theory, and the
distribution of French aﬀected datives. In The Proceedings of the
Tenth West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, 27–39, Stanford,
CA. Stanford Linguistics Association.
Baker, M. C. 1988. Incorporation: A Theory of Grammatical Function
Changing. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Beaven, J. L. 1990. A uniﬁcation based treatment of Spanish clitics. Technical report, University of Edinburgh, Dept of Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
To appear in Proceedings of Parametric Variation in Romance and
Germanic.
Blanche-Benv´niste, C. 1975. Recherches en vue d’une th´orie de la grame
e
maire fran¸aise: Essai d’application a la syntaxe des pronoms. Paris:
c
`
Champion.
Bonet i Alsina, M. E. 1991. Morphology after Syntax: Pronominal Clitics
in Romance. PhD thesis, MIT.
Borer, H. 1984. Parametric Syntax: Case Studies in Semitic and Romance
Languages. Dordrecht: Foris.
Bratt, E. O. 1990. The French causative construction in HPSG. ms,
Stanford University.
Bresnan, J. 1982a. Control and complementation. In J. Bresnan (Ed.),
The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations, 282–390. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Romance is so complex / 43
Bresnan, J. 1982b. The passive in lexical theory. In J. Bresnan (Ed.), The
Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations, 3–86. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bresnan, J. 1990. Monotonicity and the theory of relation changes in
LFG. Language Research 26:637–652. Seoul National University, Korea.
Bresnan, J., and J. Kanerva. 1989. Locative inversion in Chichewa: A
ˆ
case study of factorization in grammar. Linguistic Inquiry 20:1–50.
Burzio, L. 1986. Italian Syntax: a Government-Binding Approach. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Butt, M., M. Isoda, and P. Sells. 1991. Complex predicates in LFG. ms,
Stanford University.
Dalrymple, M., K. Halvorsen, R. Kaplan, C. Manning, J. Maxwell,
J. Wedekind, and A. Zaenen. 1992. Relating projections. ms, Xerox PARC, Palo Alto.
Davies, W., and C. Rosen. 1988. Unions as multi-predicate clauses.
Language 64:52–88.
Di Sciullo, A. M., and S. T. Rosen. 1990. Light and semi-light verb constructions. In K. Dziwirek, P. Farrell, and E. Mej´
ıas-Bikandi (Eds.),
Grammatical Relations: A Cross-Theoretical Perspective, 109–125.
Stanford, CA: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Di Sciullo, A. M., and E. Williams. 1987. On the Deﬁnition of Word.
Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Emonds, J. 1978. The verbal complex V-V in French. Linguistic Inquiry
9:151–175.
Falk, Y. N. 1984. The English auxiliary system: A lexical-functional
analysis. Language 60:483–509.
Gazdar, G., E. Klein, G. K. Pullum, and I. A. Sag. 1985. Generalized phrase structure grammar: a theoretical synopsis. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Gibson, J., and E. Raposo. 1986. Clause union, the stratal uniqueness law
and the chˆmeur relation. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory
o
4:295–331.
Grimshaw, J. 1982. On the lexical representation of Romance reﬂexive clitics. In J. Bresnan (Ed.), The Mental Representation of Grammatical
Relations, 87–148. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

44 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Halvorsen, P.-K., and R. M. Kaplan. 1988. Projections and semantic description in Lexical-Functional Grammar. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Fifth Generation Computer Systems, FGCS88, 1116–1122, Tokyo. Institute for New Generation Systems.
Jaeggli, O. 1982. Topics in Romance Syntax. Dordrecht: Foris.
Kaplan, R. M. 1987. Three seductions of computational psycholinguistics. In P. Whitelock, H. Somers, P. Bennett, R. Johnson, and M. M.
Wood (Eds.), Linguistic Theory and Computer Applications, 149–181.
London: Academic Press.
Kaplan, R. M., and J. Bresnan. 1982. Lexical-Functional Grammar: A
formal system for grammatical representation. In J. Bresnan (Ed.),
The Mental Representation of Grammatical Relations, 173–281. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kayne, R. S. 1975. French syntax: The transformational cycle. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kayne, R. S. 1989. Null subjects and clitic climbing. In O. Jaeggli
and K. Saﬁr (Eds.), The Null Subject Parameter, 239–261. Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Koopman, H. 1984. The Syntax of Verbs. Dordrecht: Foris.
Koster, J. 1975. Dutch as an SOV language. Linguistic Analysis 1:111–
136.
Koster, J. 1987. Domains and Dynasties: The Radical Autonomy of
Syntax. Dordrecht: Foris.
Ladusaw, W. A. 1988. A proposed distinction between levels and strata.
In Linguistics in the Morning Calm 2: Selected Papers from SICOL1986, 37–51, Seoul. The Linguistic Society of Korea, Hanshin.
Miller, P. H. 1991. Clitics and Constituents in Phrase Structure Grammar. PhD thesis, Utrecht. Published by Garland, New York, 1992.
Moore, J. 1990. Spanish clause reduction with downstairs cliticization. In
K. Dziwirek, P. Farrell, and E. Mej´
ıas-Bikandi (Eds.), Grammatical
Relations: A Cross-Theoretical Perspective, 319–333. Stanford, CA:
Stanford Linguistics Association.
Morin, Y.-C. 1979. More remarks on French clitic order. Linguistic
Analysis 5:293–312.
Perlmutter, D. M. 1971. Deep and Surface Structure Constraints in Syntax. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Romance is so complex / 45
Picallo, M. C. 1990. Modal verbs in Catalan. Natural Language &
Linguistic Theory 8:285–312.
Pollard, C., and I. A. Sag. 1987. Information-Based Syntax and Semantics. Vol. 1. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and
Information.
Pollard, C., and I. A. Sag. forthcoming. Head-Driven Phrase Structure
Grammar. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
Pollard, C. J. 1984. Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar, Head Grammars, and Natural Language. PhD thesis, Stanford University.
Pollock, J.-Y. 1989. Verb movement, universal grammar, and the structure of IP. Linguistic Inquiry 20:365–424.
Raposo, E., and J. Uriagereka. 1990. Object agreement in the impersonal -se passive construction in European Portugese. In K. Dziwirek,
P. Farrell, and E. Mej´
ıas-Bikandi (Eds.), Grammatical Relations: A
Cross-Theoretical Perspective, 387–399. Stanford, CA: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Rizzi, L. 1982. Issues in Italian Syntax. Dordrecht: Foris. [Chapter 1
published in 1978 as “A Restructuring Rule in Italian Syntax”].
Rizzi, L., and I. Roberts. 1989. Complex inversion in French. Probus
1:1–30.
Rosen, C. 1990. Italian evidence for multi-predicate clauses. In K. Dziwirek, P. Farrell, and E. Mej´
ıas-Bikandi (Eds.), Grammatical Relations: A Cross-Theoretical Perspective, 415–444. Stanford, CA: Stanford Linguistics Association.
Rosen, S. T. 1989. Argument Structure and Complex Predicates. PhD
thesis, Brandeis University.
Ross, J. R. 1967. Constraints on Variables in Syntax. PhD thesis, MIT.
Saltarelli, M. 1988. Basque. London: Croom Helm.
Williams, E. 1979. The French causative construction. ms, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Zagona, K. T. 1988. Verb Phrase Syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Zubizarreta, M. L. 1982. On the Relationship of the Lexicon to Syntax.
PhD thesis, MIT.

46 / Report No. CSLI-92-168
Zubizarreta, M. L. 1985. The relation between morphophonology and
morphosyntax: The case of Romance causatives. Linguistic Inquiry
16:247–290.
Zwicky, A. M., and G. K. Pullum. 1983. Cliticization vs. inﬂection:
English n’t. Language 59:502–513.

