STARSEM-2012

Sorting out the Most Confusing English Phrasal Verbs
Yuancheng Tu
Department of Linguistics
University of Illinois
ytu@illinois.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a full-ﬂedged
supervised machine learning framework for
identifying English phrasal verbs in a given
context. We concentrate on those that we deﬁne as the most confusing phrasal verbs, in the
sense that they are the most commonly used
ones whose occurrence may correspond either
to a true phrasal verb or an alignment of a simple verb with a preposition.
We construct a benchmark dataset1 with 1,348
sentences from BNC, annotated via an Internet crowdsourcing platform. This dataset is
further split into two groups, more idiomatic
group which consists of those that tend to be
used as a true phrasal verb and more compositional group which tends to be used either
way. We build a discriminative classiﬁer with
easily available lexical and syntactic features
and test it over the datasets. The classiﬁer
overall achieves 79.4% accuracy, 41.1% error deduction compared to the corpus majority baseline 65%. However, it is even more
interesting to discover that the classiﬁer learns
more from the more compositional examples
than those idiomatic ones.

1

Introduction

Phrasal verbs in English (also called English Particle Constructions), are syntactically deﬁned as combinations of verbs and prepositions or particles, but
semantically their meanings are generally not the direct sum of their parts. For example, give in means
submit, yield in the sentence, Adam’s saying it’s important to stand ﬁrm , not give in to terrorists. Adam
1

http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/resources/PVC Data

Dan Roth
Department of Computer Science
University of Illinois
danr@illinois.edu

was not giving anything and he was not in anywhere
either. Kolln and Funk (Kolln and Funk, 1998) use
the test of meaning to detect English phrasal verbs,
i.e., each phrasal verb could be replaced by a single
verb with the same general meaning, for example,
using yield to replace give in in the aforementioned
sentence. To confuse the issue even further, some
phrasal verbs, for example, give in in the following two sentences, are used either as a true phrasal
verb (the ﬁrst sentence) or not (the second sentence)
though their surface forms look cosmetically identical.
1. How many Englishmen gave in to their emotions like that ?
2. It is just this denial of anything beyond what is
directly given in experience that marks Berkeley out as an empiricist .
This paper is targeting to build an automatic learner
which can recognize a true phrasal verb from its
orthographically identical construction with a verb
and a prepositional phrase. Similar to other types
of MultiWord Expressions (MWEs) (Sag et al.,
2002), the syntactic complexity and semantic idiosyncrasies of phrasal verbs pose many particular
challenges in empirical Natural Language Processing (NLP). Even though a few of previous works
have explored this identiﬁcation problem empirically (Li et al., 2003; Kim and Baldwin, 2009) and
theoretically (Jackendoff, 2002), we argue in this paper that this context sensitive identiﬁcation problem
is not so easy as conceivably shown before, especially when it is used to handle those more compositional phrasal verbs which are empirically used
either way in the corpus as a true phrasal verb or
a simplex verb with a preposition combination. In

addition, there is still a lack of adequate resources
or benchmark datasets to identify and treat phrasal
verbs within a given context. This research is also
an attempt to bridge this gap by constructing a publicly available dataset which focuses on some of the
most commonly used phrasal verbs within their most
confusing contexts.
Our study in this paper focuses on six of the most
frequently used verbs, take, make, have, get, do and
give and their combination with nineteen common
prepositions or particles, such as on, in, up, for, over
etc. We categorize these phrasal verbs according to
their continuum of compositionality, splitting them
into two groups based on the biggest gap within
this scale, and build a discriminative learner which
uses easily available syntactic and lexical features to
analyze them comparatively. This learner achieves
79.4% overall accuracy for the whole dataset and
learns the most from the more compositional data
group with 51.2% error reduction over its 46.6% majority baseline.

2

Related Work

Phrasal verbs in English were observed as one kind
of composition that is used frequently and constitutes the greatest difﬁculty for language learners
more than two hundred and ﬁfty years ago in Samuel
Johnson’s Dictionary of English Language2 . They
have also been well-studied in modern linguistics
since early days (Bolinger, 1971; Kolln and Funk,
1998; Jackendoff, 2002). Careful linguistic descriptions and investigations reveal a wide range of English phrasal verbs that are syntactically uniform,
but diverge largely in semantics, argument structure and lexical status. The complexity and idiosyncrasies of English phrasal verbs also pose a special challenge to computational linguistics and attract considerable amount of interest and investigation for their extraction, disambiguation as well as
identiﬁcation.
Recent computational research on English phrasal
verbs have been focused on increasing the coverage
and scalability of phrasal verbs by either extracting
unlisted phrasal verbs from large corpora (Villavicencio, 2003; Villavicencio, 2006), or constructing
productive lexical rules to generate new cases (Vil2

It is written in the Preface of that dictionary.

lanvicencio and Copestake, 2003). Some other researchers follow the semantic regularities of the particles associated with these phrasal verbs and concentrate on disambiguation of phrasal verb semantics, such as the investigation of the most common
particle up by (Cook and Stevenson, 2006).
Research on token identiﬁcation of phrasal verbs
is much less compared to the extraction. (Li et
al., 2003) describes a regular expression based simple system. Regular expression based method requires human constructed regular patterns and cannot make predictions for Out-Of-Vocabulary phrasal
verbs. Thus, it is hard to be adapted to other NLP
applications directly. (Kim and Baldwin, 2009) proposes a memory-based system with post-processed
linguistic features such as selectional preferences.
Their system assumes the perfect outputs of a parser
and requires laborious human corrections to them.
The research presented in this paper differs from
these previous identiﬁcation works mainly in two
aspects. First of all, our learning system is fully
automatic in the sense that no human intervention
is needed, no need to construct regular patterns or
to correct parser mistakes. Secondly, we focus our
attention on the comparison of the two groups of
phrasal verbs, the more idiomatic group and the
more compositional group. We argue that while
more idiomatic phrasal verbs may be easier to identify and can have above 90% accuracy, there is still
much room to learn for those more compostional
phrasal verbs which tend to be used either positively
or negatively depending on the given context.

3

Identiﬁcation of English Phrasal Verbs

We formulate the context sensitive English phrasal
verb identiﬁcation task as a supervised binary classiﬁcation problem. For each target candidate within
a sentence, the classiﬁer decides if it is a true phrasal
verb or a simplex verb with a preposition. Formally,
given a set of n labeled examples {xi , yi }n , we
i=1
learn a function f : X → Y where Y ∈ {−1, 1}.
The learning algorithm we use is the soft-margin
SVM with L2-loss. The learning package we use
is LIBLINEAR (Chang and Lin, 2001)3 .
Three types of features are used in this discriminative model. (1)Words: given the window size from
3

http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/liblinear/

the one before to the one after the target phrase,
Words feature consists of every surface string of
all shallow chunks within that window. It can be
an n-word chunk or a single word depending on
the the chunk’s bracketing. (2)ChunkLabel: the
chunk name with the given window size, such as VP,
PP, etc. (3)ParserBigram: the bi-gram of the nonterminal label of the parents of both the verb and
the particle. For example, from this partial tree (VP
(VB get)(PP (IN through)(NP (DT the)(NN day))),
the parent label for the verb get is VP and the parent node label for the particle through is PP. Thus,
this feature value is VP-PP. Our feature extractor
is implemented in Java through a publicly available
NLP library4 via the tool called Curator (Clarke et
al., 2012). The shallow parser is publicly available (Punyakanok and Roth, 2001)5 and the parser
we use is from Charniak (Charniak and Johnson,
2005).

4

Experiments and Analysis

In this section, we ﬁrst present the generation and
annotation of our phrasal verb dataset and the criteria we use to split this dataset into two groups: more
idiomatic group and more compositional group.
Then we describe in detail our experiment results
with respect to both of whole dataset as well as these
two groups.
4.1 Data Preparation and Annotation
All sentences in our dataset are extracted from BNC
(XML Edition), a balanced synchronic corpus containing 100 million words collected from various
sources of British English. We ﬁrst construct a list of
phrasal verbs for the six verbs that we are interested
in from two resources, WN3.0 (Fellbaum, 1998)
and DIRECT6 . Since these targeted verbs are also
commonly used in English Light Verb Constructions
(LVCs), we ﬁlter out LVCs in our list using a publicly available LVC corpus (Tu and Roth, 2011). The
result list consists of a total of 245 phrasal verbs.
We then search over BNC and ﬁnd sentences for all
of them. We choose the frequency threshold to be
25 and generate a list of 122 phrasal verbs. Finally
4

http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/software/edison/
http://cogcomp.cs.illinois.edu/page/software view/Chunker
6
http://u.cs.biu.ac.il/∼nlp/downloads/DIRECT.html

5

we manually pick out 23 of these phrasal verbs and
sample randomly 10% extracted sentences for each
of them for annotation.
The annotation is done through a crowdsourcing
platform7 . The annotators are asked to identify true
phrasal verbs within a sentence. The reported innerannotator agreement is 84.5% and the gold average accuracy is 88%. These numbers indicate the
good quality of the annotation. The ﬁnal corpus
consists of 1,348 sentences among which, 65% with
a true phrasal verb and 35% with a simplex verbpreposition combination.
4.2 Dataset Splitting
Table 1 lists all verbs in the dataset. Total is the total number of sentences annotated for that phrasal
verb and Positive indicated the number of examples
which are annotated as containing the true phrasal
verb usage. In this table, the decreasing percentage of the true phrasal verb usage within the dataset
indicates the increasing compositionality of these
phrasal verbs. The natural division line with this
scale is the biggest percentage gap (about 10%) between make out and get at. Hence, two groups are
split over that gap. The more idiomatic group consists of the ﬁrst 11 verbs with 554 sentences and 91%
of these sentences include true phrasal verb usage.
This data group is more biased toward the positive
examples. The more compositional data group has
12 verbs with 794 examples and only 46.6% of them
contain true phrasal verb usage. Therefore, this data
group is more balanced with respective to positive
and negative usage of the phrase verbs.
4.3 Experimental Results and Discussion
Our results are computed via 5-cross validation. We
plot the classiﬁer performance with respect to the overall dataset, the more compositional group and the more
idiomatic group in Figure 1. The classiﬁer only improves
0.6% when evaluated on the idiomatic group. Phrasal
verbs in this dataset are more biased toward behaving
like an idiom regardless of their contexts, thus are more
likely to be captured by rules or patterns. We assume this
may explain some high numbers reported in some previous works. However, our classiﬁer is more effective
over the more compositional group and reaches 73.9%
accuracy, a 51.1% error deduction comparing to its majority baseline. Phrasal verbs in this set tend to be used
7

crowdﬂower.com

Total
6
61
28
70
17
11
51
7
212
34
57
35
142
10
13
206
8
140
9
20
12
118
81
1348

Positive
6
60
27
67
16
10
45
6
181
29
48
26
103
7
8
118
4
65
3
6
3
27
13
878

Percent(%)
1.00
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.94
0.91
0.88
0.86
0.85
0.85
0.84
0.74
0.73
0.70
0.62
0.57
0.50
0.46
0.33
0.30
0.25
0.23
0.16
0.65

Table 1: The top group consists of the more idiomatic
phrasal verbs with 91% of their occurrence within the
dataset to be a true phrasal verb. The second group consists of those more compositional ones with only 46.6%
of their usage in the dataset to be a true phrasal verb.
equally likely as a true phrasal verb and as a simplex verbpreposition combination, depending on their context. We
argue phrasal verbs such as these pose a real challenge
for building an automatic context sensitive phrasal verb
classiﬁer. The overall accuracy of our preliminary classiﬁer is about 79.4% when it is evaluated over all examples
from these two groups.
Finally, we conduct an ablation analysis to explore the
contributions of the three types of features in our model
and their accuracies with respect to each data group are
listed in Table 2 with the boldfaced best performance.
Each type of features is used individually in the classiﬁer. The feature type Words is the most effective feature with respect to the idiomatic group and the overall
dataset. And the chunk feature is more effective towards
the compositional group, which may explain the linguistic intuition that negative phrasal verbs usually do not belong to the same syntactic chunk.

Classifier Accuracy for Different Data Groups
Comparison against their Majority Baselines Respectively
1.2
Majority Baseline
Classifier Accuracy
1

0.8
Accuracy

Verb
get onto
get through
get together
get on with
get down to
get by
get off
get behind
take on
get over
make out
get at
get on
take after
do up
get out
do good
make for
get it on
get about
make over
give in
have on
Total: 23

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
Overall

Compositional
Data Groups

Idiomatic

Figure 1: Classiﬁer Accuracy of each data group, comparing with their baseline respectively. Classiﬁer learns
the most from the more compositional group, indicated
by its biggest histogram gap.

Baseline
Words
Chunk
ParserBi

Overall
65.0%
78.6%
65.6%
64.4%

Datasets
Compositional
46.6%
70.2%
70.7%
67.2%

Idiom.
91%
91.4%
89.4%
89.4%

Table 2: Accuracies achieved by the classiﬁer when
tested on different data groups. Features are used individually to evaluate the effectiveness of each type.

5

Conclusion

In this paper, we build a discriminative learner to identify English phrasal verbs within a given context. By
focusing our attention on the comparison between these
more idiomatically biased phrasal verbs and those more
compositional ones, we are able to not only explain the
conceivable high accuracy a classiﬁer may achieve over
these more idiomatic ones, but also arguing that the bigger challenge is for those more compositional cases.
Our contributions in this paper are threefold. We
construct a publicly available context sensitive English
phrasal verb dataset with 1,348 sentences from BNC.
We split the dataset into two groups according to their
tendency toward idiosyncrasy and compositionality, and
build a discriminative learner which uses easily available syntactic and lexical features to analyze them comparatively. We demonstrate empirically that high accuracy achieved by models may be due to the stronger idiomatic tendency of these phrasal verbs. For many of the
more ambiguous cases, a classiﬁer learns more from the
compositional examples and these phrasal verbs are more
challenging.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank four annonymous reviewers for their valuable comments. The research in
this paper was supported by the Multimodal Information Access & Synthesis Center at UIUC, part of CCICADA, a DHS Science and Technology Center of Excellence and the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) Machine Reading Program under Air
Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) prime contract no.
FA8750-09-C-0181. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the
view of DHS, DARPA, AFRL, or the US government.

References
D. Bolinger. 1971. The Phrasal Verb in English. Harvard University Press.
C. Chang and C. Lin, 2001.
LIBSVM: a library
for support vector machines. Software available at
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm.
E. Charniak and M. Johnson. 2005. Coarse-to-ﬁne nbest parsing and maxent discriminative reranking. In
Proceedings of ACL-2005.
J. Clarke, V. Srikumar, M. Sammons, and D. Roth. 2012.
An NLP curator: How I learned to stop worrying and
love NLP pipelines. In Proceedings of LREC-2012.
P. Cook and S. Stevenson. 2006. Classifying particle
semantics in English verb-particle constructions. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Identifying and Exploiting Underlying Properties, pages 45–53, Sydney, Australia.
C. Fellbaum, editor. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.
R. Jackendoff. 2002. English particle constructions, the
lexicon, and the autonomy of syntax. In N. Deh´ ,
e
R. Jackendoff, A. McIntyre, and S. Urban, editors,
Verb-Particle Explorations, pages 67–94. Mouton de
Gruyter.
S Kim and T. Baldwin. 2009. How to pick out token
instances of English verb-particle constructions. Journal of Language Resources and Evaluation.
M. Kolln and R. Funk. 1998. Understanding English
Grammar. Allyn and Bacon.
W. Li, X. Zhang, C. Niu, Y. Jiang, and R. Srihari. 2003.
An expert lexicon approach to identifying English
phrasal verbs. In Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of ACL, pages 513–520.
V. Punyakanok and D. Roth. 2001. The use of classiﬁers
in sequential inference. In NIPS, pages 995–1001.
I. Sag, T. Baldwin, F. Bond, and A. Copestake. 2002.
Multiword expressions: A pain in the neck for NLP.

In Proc. of the 3rd International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing and Computational Linguistics
(CICLing-2002), pages 1–15.
Y. Tu and D. Roth. 2011. Learning english light verb
constructions: Contextual or statistica. In Proceedings
of the ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: from
Parsing and Generation to the Real World.
A. Villanvicencio and A. Copestake. 2003. Verb-particle
constructions in a computational grammar of English.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
HPSG, pages 357–371.
A. Villavicencio. 2003. Verb-particle constructions and
lexical resources. In Proceedings of the ACL 2003
Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Analysis, Acquisition and Treatment, pages 57–64.
A. Villavicencio, 2006. Computational Linguistics Dimensions of the Syntax and Semantics of Prepositions,
chapter Verb-Particel Constructions in the World Wide
Web. Springer.

