Painless Unsupervised Learning with Features
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick

Alexandre Bouchard-Cˆ t´
o e John DeNero
Computer Science Division
University of California at Berkeley
{tberg, bouchard, denero, klein}@cs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
We show how features can easily be added
to standard generative models for unsupervised learning, without requiring complex
new training methods. In particular, each
component multinomial of a generative model
can be turned into a miniature logistic regression model if feature locality permits. The intuitive EM algorithm still applies, but with a
gradient-based M-step familiar from discriminative training of logistic regression models. We apply this technique to part-of-speech
induction, grammar induction, word alignment, and word segmentation, incorporating
a few linguistically-motivated features into
the standard generative model for each task.
These feature-enhanced models each outperform their basic counterparts by a substantial
margin, and even compete with and surpass
more complex state-of-the-art models.

1

Introduction

Unsupervised learning methods have been increasingly successful in recent NLP research. The reasons are varied: increased supplies of unlabeled
data, improved understanding of modeling methods,
additional choices of optimization algorithms, and,
perhaps most importantly for the present work, incorporation of richer domain knowledge into structured models. Unfortunately, that knowledge has
generally been encoded in the form of conditional
independence structure, which means that injecting
it is both tricky (because the connection between
independence and knowledge is subtle) and timeconsuming (because new structure often necessitates
new inference algorithms).
In this paper, we present a range of experiments
wherein we improve existing unsupervised models
by declaratively adding richer features. In particular, we parameterize the local multinomials of exist-

Dan Klein

ing generative models using features, in a way which
does not require complex new machinery but which
still provides substantial ﬂexibility. In the featureengineering paradigm, one can worry less about the
backbone structure and instead use hand-designed
features to declaratively inject domain knowledge
into a model. While feature engineering has historically been associated with discriminative, supervised learning settings, we argue that it can and
should be applied more broadly to the unsupervised
setting.
The idea of using features in unsupervised learning is neither new nor even controversial. Many
top unsupervised results use feature-based models (Smith and Eisner, 2005; Haghighi and Klein,
2006). However, such approaches have presented
their own barriers, from challenging normalization
problems, to neighborhood design, to the need for
complex optimization procedures. As a result, most
work still focuses on the stable and intuitive approach of using the EM algorithm to optimize data
likelihood in locally normalized, generative models.
The primary contribution of this paper is to
demonstrate the clear empirical success of a simple and accessible approach to unsupervised learning with features, which can be optimized by using standard NLP building blocks. We consider
the same generative, locally-normalized models that
dominate past work on a range of tasks. However,
we follow Chen (2003), Bisani and Ney (2008), and
Bouchard-Cˆ t´ et al. (2008), and allow each comoe
ponent multinomial of the model to be a miniature
multi-class logistic regression model. In this case,
the EM algorithm still applies with the E-step unchanged. The M-step involves gradient-based training familiar from standard supervised logistic regression (i.e., maximum entropy models). By integrating these two familiar learning techniques, we
add features to unsupervised models without any

specialized learning or inference.
A second contribution of this work is to show that
further gains can be achieved by directly optimizing data likelihood with LBFGS (Liu et al., 1989).
This alternative optimization procedure requires no
additional machinery beyond what EM uses. This
approach is still very simple to implement, and we
found that it empirically outperforms EM.
This paper is largely empirical; the underlying optimization techniques are known, even if the overall
approach will be novel to many readers. As an empirical demonstration, our results span an array of
unsupervised learning tasks: part-of-speech induction, grammar induction, word alignment, and word
segmentation. In each task, we show that declaring a
few linguistically motivated feature templates yields
state-of-the-art results.

2

Models

We start by explaining our feature-enhanced model
for part-of-speech (POS) induction. This particular
example illustrates our approach to adding features
to unsupervised models in a well-known NLP task.
We then explain how the technique applies more
generally.
2.1

Example: Part-of-Speech Induction

POS induction consists of labeling words in text
with POS tags. A hidden Markov model (HMM) is a
standard model for this task, used in both a frequentist setting (Merialdo, 1994; Elworthy, 1994) and in
a Bayesian setting (Goldwater and Grifﬁths, 2007;
Johnson, 2007).
A POS HMM generates a sequence of words in
order. In each generation step, an observed word
emission yi and a hidden successor POS tag zi+1 are
generated independently, conditioned on the current
POS tag zi . This process continues until an absorbing stop state is generated by the transition model.
There are two types of conditional distributions in
the model—emission and transition probabilities—
that are both multinomial probability distributions.
The joint likelihood factors into these distributions:
Pθ (Y = y, Z = z) = Pθ (Z1 = z1 ) ·
|z|

Pθ (Yi = yi |Zi = zi ) · Pθ (Zi+1 = zi+1 |Zi = zi )
i=1

The emission distribution Pθ (Yi = yi |Zi = zi ) is
parameterized by conditional probabilities θy,z,EMIT
for each word y given tag z. Alternatively, we can
express this emission distribution as the output of a
logistic regression model, replacing the explicit conditional probability table by a logistic function parameterized by weights and features:
θy,z,EMIT (w) =

exp w, f (y, z, EMIT)
y exp w, f (y , z, EMIT )

This feature-based logistic expression is equivalent
to the ﬂat multinomial in the case that the feature
function f (y, z, EMIT) consists of all indicator features on tuples (y, z, EMIT), which we call BASIC
features. The equivalence follows by setting weight
wy,z,EMIT = log(θy,z,EMIT ).1 This formulation is
known as the natural parameterization of the multinomial distribution.
In order to enhance this emission distribution, we
include coarse features in f (y, z, EMIT), in addition to the BASIC features. Crucially, these features
can be active across multiple (y, z) values. In this
way, the model can abstract general patterns, such
as a POS tag co-occurring with an inﬂectional morpheme. We discuss speciﬁc POS features in Section 4.
2.2

General Directed Models

Like the HMM, all of the models we propose are
based on locally normalized generative decisions
that condition on some context. In general, let X =
(Z, Y) denote the sequence of generation steps (random variables) where Z contains all hidden random
variables and Y contains all observed random variables. The joint probability of this directed model
factors as:
Pw (X = x) =

Pw Xi = xi Xπ(i) = xπ(i) ,
i∈I

where Xπ(i) denotes the parents of Xi and I is the
index set of the variables in X.
In the models that we use, each factor in the above
expression is the output of a local logistic regression
1

As long as no transition or emission probabilities are equal
to zero. When zeros are present, for instance to model that an
absorbing stop state can only transition to itself, it is often possible to absorb these zeros into a base measure. All the arguments
in this paper carry with a structured base measure; we drop it for
simplicity.

model parameterized by w:

These expected counts are then normalized in the
M-step to re-estimate θ:

˛
`
´
exp w, f (d, c, t)
Pw Xi = d˛Xπ(i) = c = P
d exp w, f (d , c, t)

Above, d is the generative decision value for Xi
picked by the model, c is the conditioning context
tuple of values for the parents of Xi , and t is the
type of decision being made. For instance, the POS
HMM has two types of decisions: transitions and
emissions. In the emission model, the type t is EMIT,
the decision d is a word and the context c is a tag.
The denominator normalizes the factor to be a probability distribution over decisions.
The objective function we derive from this model
is the marginal likelihood of the observations y,
along with a regularization term:
L(w) = log Pw (Y = y) − κ||w||2
2

(1)

This model has two advantages over the more prevalent form of a feature-rich unsupervised model, the
globally normalized Markov random ﬁeld.2 First,
as we explain in Section 3, optimizing our objective does not require computing expectations over
the joint distribution. In the case of the POS HMM,
for example, we do not need to enumerate an inﬁnite sum of products of potentials when optimizing, in contrast to Haghighi and Klein (2006). Second, we found that locally normalized models empirically outperform their globally normalized counterparts, despite their efﬁciency and simplicity.

3

Optimization

3.1 Optimizing with Expectation Maximization
In this section, we describe the EM algorithm applied to our feature-rich, locally normalized models.
For models parameterized by standard multinomials, EM optimizes L(θ) = log Pθ (Y = y) (Dempster et al., 1977). The E-step computes expected
counts for each tuple of decision d, context c, and
multinomial type t:

1(Xi = d, Xπ(i) = c, t) Y = y

ed,c,t ← Eθ

(2)

i∈I
2

The locally normalized model class is actually equivalent
to its globally normalized counterpart when the former meets
the following three conditions: (1) The graphical model is a
directed tree. (2) The BASIC features are included in f . (3) We
do not include regularization in the model (κ = 0). This follows
from Smith and Johnson (2007).

θd,c,t ←

ed,c,t
d ed ,c,t

Normalizing expected counts in this way maximizes
the expected complete log likelihood with respect to
the current model parameters.
EM can likewise optimize L(w) for our locally
normalized models with logistic parameterizations.
The E-step ﬁrst precomputes multinomial parameters from w for each decision, context, and type:
θd,c,t (w) ←

exp w, f (d, c, t)
d exp w, f (d , c, t)

Then, expected counts e are computed according to Equation 2. In the case of POS induction,
expected counts are computed with the forwardbackward algorithm in both the standard and logistic
parameterizations. The only change is that the conditional probabilities θ are now functions of w.
The M-step changes more substantially, but still
relies on canonical NLP learning methods. We wish
to choose w to optimize the regularized expected
complete log likelihood:
ed,c,t log θd,c,t (w) − κ||w||2
2

(w, e) =

(3)

d,c,t

We optimize this objective via a gradient-based
search algorithm like LBFGS. The gradient with respect to w takes the form
ed,c,t · ∆d,c,t (w) − 2κ · w

(w, e) =

(4)

d,c,t

∆d,c,t (w) = f (d, c, t) −

θd ,c,t (w)f (d , c, t)
d

This gradient matches that of regularized logistic regression in a supervised model: the difference ∆ between the observed and expected features,
summed over every decision and context. In the supervised case, we would observe the count of occurrences of (d, c, t), but in the unsupervised M-step,
we instead substitute expected counts ed,c,t .
This gradient-based M-step is an iterative procedure. For each different value of w considered during the search, we must recompute θ(w), which requires computation in proportion to the size of the

parameter space. However, e stays ﬁxed throughout
the M-step. Algorithm 1 outlines EM in its entirety.
The subroutine climb(·, ·, ·) represents a generic optimization step such as an LBFGS iteration.
Algorithm 1 Feature-enhanced EM
repeat
Compute expected counts e
repeat
Compute (w, e)
Compute (w, e)
w ← climb(w, (w, e),

£ Eq. 2
£ Eq. 3
£ Eq. 4

(w, e))

until convergence
until convergence

3.2

Direct Marginal Likelihood Optimization

Another approach to optimizing Equation 1 is to
compute the gradient of the log marginal likelihood
directly (Salakhutdinov et al., 2003). The gradient
turns out to have the same form as Equation 4, with
the key difference that ed,c,t is recomputed for every
different value of w. Algorithm 2 outlines the procedure. Justiﬁcation for this algorithm appears in the
Appendix.
Algorithm 2 Feature-enhanced direct gradient
repeat
Compute expected counts e
£ Eq. 2
Compute L(w)
£ Eq. 1
Compute
(w, e)
£ Eq. 4
w ← climb(w, L(w),

(w, e))

until convergence
In practice, we ﬁnd that this optimization approach leads to higher task accuracy for several
models. However, in cases where computing ed,c,t
is expensive, EM can be a more efﬁcient alternative.

4

Part-of-Speech Induction

We now describe experiments that demonstrate the
effectiveness of locally normalized logistic models.
We ﬁrst use the bigram HMM described in Section 2.1 for POS induction, which has two types of
multinomials. For type EMIT, the decisions d are
words and contexts c are tags. For type TRANS, the
decisions and contexts are both tags.

4.1

POS Induction Features

We use the same set of features used by Haghighi
and Klein (2006) in their baseline globally normalized Markov random ﬁeld (MRF) model. These are
all coarse features on emission contexts that activate
for words with certain orthographic properties. We
use only the BASIC features for transitions. For
an emission with word y and tag z, we use the
following feature templates:

1(y = ·, z = ·)
Check if y contains digit and conjoin
with z:
1(containsDigit(y) = ·, z = ·)
C ONTAINS -H YPHEN: 1(containsHyphen(x) = ·, z = ·)
I NITIAL -C AP:
Check if the ﬁrst letter of y is
capitalized: 1(isCap(y) = ·, z = ·)
S UFFIX:
Indicator functions for character sufﬁxes of up to length 3 present in y.
BASIC:
C ONTAINS -D IGIT:

4.2

POS Induction Data and Evaluation

We train and test on the entire WSJ tag corpus (Marcus et al., 1993). We attempt the most difﬁcult version of this task where the only information our system can make use of is the unlabeled text itself. In
particular, we do not make use of a tagging dictionary. We use 45 tag clusters, the number of POS tags
that appear in the WSJ corpus. There is an identiﬁability issue when evaluating inferred tags. In order to measure accuracy on the hand-labeled corpus,
we map each cluster to the tag that gives the highest
accuracy, the many-1 evaluation approach (Johnson,
2007). We run all POS induction models for 1000
iterations, with 10 random initializations. The mean
and standard deviation of many-1 accuracy appears
in Table 1.
4.3

POS Induction Results

We compare our model to the basic HMM and a bigram version of the feature-enhanced MRF model of
Haghighi and Klein (2006). Using EM, we achieve
a many-1 accuracy of 68.1. This outperforms the
basic HMM baseline by a 5.0 margin. The same
model, trained using the direct gradient approach,
achieves a many-1 accuracy of 75.5, outperforming
the basic HMM baseline by a margin of 12.4. These
results show that the direct gradient approach can offer additional boosts in performance when used with
a feature-enhanced model. We also outperform the

globally normalized MRF, which uses the same set
of features and which we train using a direct gradient approach.
To the best of our knowledge, our system achieves
the best performance to date on the WSJ corpus for
totally unsupervised POS tagging.3

5

Grammar Induction

We next apply our technique to a grammar induction
task: the unsupervised learning of dependency parse
trees via the dependency model with valence (DMV)
(Klein and Manning, 2004). A dependency parse is
a directed tree over tokens in a sentence. Each edge
of the tree speciﬁes a directed dependency from a
head token to a dependent, or argument token. Thus,
the number of dependencies in a parse is exactly the
number of tokens in the sentence, not counting the
artiﬁcial root token.
5.1

Dependency Model with Valence

The DMV deﬁnes a probability distribution over dependency parse trees. In this head-outward attachment model, a parse and the word tokens are derived
together through a recursive generative process. For
each token generated so far, starting with the root, a
set of left dependents is generated, followed by a set
of right dependents.
There are two types of multinomial distributions
in this model. The Bernoulli STOP probabilities
θd,c,STOP capture the valence of a particular head. For
this type, the decision d is whether or not to stop
generating arguments, and the context c contains the
current head h, direction δ and adjacency adj. If
a head’s stop probability is high, it will be encouraged to accept few arguments. The ATTACH multinomial probability distributions θd,c,ATTACH capture
attachment preferences of heads. For this type, a decision d is an argument token a, and the context c
consists of a head h and a direction δ.
We take the same approach as previous work
(Klein and Manning, 2004; Cohen and Smith, 2009)
and use gold POS tags in place of words.
3

Haghighi and Klein (2006) achieve higher accuracies by
making use of labeled prototypes. We do not use any external
information.

5.2

Grammar Induction Features

One way to inject knowledge into a dependency
model is to encode the similarity between the various morphological variants of nouns and verbs. We
encode this similarity by incorporating features into
both the STOP and the ATTACH probabilities. The
attachment features appear below; the stop feature
templates are similar and are therefore omitted.
BASIC:
N OUN:

1(a = ·, h = ·, δ = ·)

Generalize the morphological variants of
nouns by using isNoun(·):
1(a = ·, isNoun(h) = ·, δ = ·)
1(isNoun(a) = ·, h = ·, δ = ·)
1(isNoun(a) = ·, isNoun(h) = ·, δ = ·)
V ERB:
Same as above, generalizing verbs instead
of nouns by using isVerb(·)
N OUN -V ERB: Same as above, generalizing with
isVerbOrNoun(·) = isVerb(·)∨isNoun(·)
BACK -O FF: We add versions of all other features that
ignore direction or adjacency.

While the model has the expressive power to allow speciﬁc morphological variants to have their
own behaviors, the existence of coarse features encourages uniform analyses, which in turn gives better accuracies.
Cohen and Smith’s (2009) method has similar
characteristics. They add a shared logistic-normal
prior (SLN) to the DMV in order to tie multinomial
parameters across related derivation events. They
achieve their best results by only tying parameters between different multinomials when the corresponding contexts are headed by nouns and verbs.
This observation motivates the features we choose to
incorporate into the DMV.
5.3

Grammar Induction Data and Evaluation

For our English experiments we train and report directed attachment accuracy on portions of the WSJ
corpus. We work with a standard, reduced version of
WSJ, WSJ10, that contains only sentences of length
10 or less after punctuation has been removed. We
train on sections 2-21, and use section 22 as a development set. We report accuracy on section 23.
These are the same training, development, and test
sets used by Cohen and Smith (2009). The regularization parameter (κ) is tuned on the development
set to maximize accuracy.
For our Chinese experiments, we use the same
corpus and training/test split as Cohen and Smith

6

Word Alignment

Word alignment is a core machine learning component of statistical machine translation systems,
and one of the few NLP tasks that is dominantly
solved using unsupervised techniques. The purpose of word alignment models is to induce a correspondence between the words of a sentence and
the words of its translation.
6.1

Word Alignment Models

We consider two classic generative alignment models that are both used heavily today, IBM Model 1
(Brown et al., 1994) and the HMM alignment model
(Ney and Vogel, 1996). These models generate a
hidden alignment vector z and an observed foreign
sentence y, all conditioned on an observed English
sentence e. The likelihood of both models takes the
form:
p(zj = i|zj−1 ) · θyj ,ei ,ALIGN

P (y, z|e) =
j

WSJ10

WSJ

Inference
EM
LBFGS
EM
LBFGS

EM
EM
LBFGS
(Cohen and Smith, 2009)
Basic-DMV
EM
Feature-DMV
EM
LBFGS
(Cohen and Smith, 2009)
Word Alignment
Basic-Model 1
EM
Feature-Model 1 EM
Basic-HMM
EM
Feature-HMM
EM
Word Segmentation
Basic-Unigram
EM
Feature-Unigram EM
LBFGS
(Johnson and Goldwater, 2009)
NIST ChEn

Grammar Induction Results

We are able to outperform Cohen and Smith’s (2009)
best system, which requires a more complicated
variational inference method, on both English and
Chinese data sets. Their system achieves an accuracy of 61.3 for English and an accuracy of 51.9 for
Chinese.4 Our feature-enhanced model, trained using the direct gradient approach, achieves an accuracy of 63.0 for English, and an accuracy of 53.6 for
Chinese. To our knowledge, our method for featurebased dependency parse induction outperforms all
existing methods that make the same set of conditional independence assumptions as the DMV.

–
1.0
5.0

Grammar Induction
Basic-DMV
Feature-DMV

BR

5.4

Reg
κ
–
0.1
1.0
1.0
κ
–
0.05
10.0

CTB10

Model
POS Induction
Basic-HMM
Feature-MRF
Feature-HMM

(2009). We train on sections 1-270 of the Penn Chinese Treebank (Xue et al., 2002), similarly reduced
(CTB10). We test on sections 271-300 of CTB10,
and use sections 400-454 as a development set.
The DMV is known to be sensitive to initialization. We use the deterministic harmonic initializer
from Klein and Manning (2004). We ran each optimization procedure for 100 iterations. The results
are reported in Table 1.

κ
–
–
–
–
κ
–
0.2
0.2

Eval
Many-1
63.1 (1.3)
59.6 (6.9)
68.1 (1.7)
75.5 (1.1)
Dir
47.8
48.3
63.0
61.3
42.5
49.9
53.6
51.9
AER
38.0
35.6
33.8
30.0
F1
76.9 (0.1)
84.5 (0.5)
88.0 (0.1)
87

Table 1: Locally normalized feature-based models outperform
all proposed baselines for all four tasks. LBFGS outperformed
EM in all cases where the algorithm was sufﬁciently fast to run.
Details of each experiment appear in the main text.

The distortion term p(zj = i|zj−1 ) is uniform in
Model 1, and Markovian in the HMM. See Liang et
al. (2006) for details on the speciﬁc variant of the
distortion model of the HMM that we used. We use
these standard distortion models in both the baseline
and feature-enhanced word alignment systems.
The bilexical emission model θy,e,ALIGN differentiates our feature-enhanced system from the baseline system. In the former, the emission model is a
standard conditional multinomial that represents the
probability that decision word y is generated from
context word e, while in our system, the emission
model is re-parameterized as a logistic regression
model and feature-enhanced.
Many supervised feature-based alignment models
have been developed. In fact, this logistic parameterization of the HMM has been proposed before and
yielded alignment improvements, but was trained
using supervised estimation techniques (Varea et al.,
2002).5 However, most full translation systems to-

4

Using additional bilingual data, Cohen and Smith (2009)
achieve an accuracy of 62.0 for English, and an accuracy of
52.0 for Chinese, still below our results.

5

Varea et al. (2002) describes unsupervised EM optimization with logistic regression models at a high level—their dy-

day rely on unsupervised learning so that the models
may be applied easily to many language pairs. Our
approach provides efﬁcient and consistent unsupervised estimation for feature-rich alignment models.
6.2

Word Alignment Features

The BASIC features on pairs of lexical items
provide strong baseline performance. We add
coarse features to the model in order to inject
prior knowledge and tie together lexical items with
similar characteristics.
BASIC:
E DIT-D ISTANCE:
D ICTIONARY:
S TEM:
P REFIX:

1(e = ·, y = ·)
1(dist(y, e) = ·)
1((y, e) ∈ D) for dictionary D.
1(stem(e) = ·, y = ·) for Porter stemmer.
1(preﬁx(e) = ·, y = ·) for preﬁxes of

C HARACTER:

length 4.
1(e = ·, charAt(y, i) = ·) for index i in
the Chinese word.

These features correspond to several common
augmentations of word alignment models, such as
adding dictionary priors and truncating long words,
but here we integrate them all coherently into a single model.
6.3

Word Alignment Data and Evaluation

We evaluate on the standard hand-aligned portion
of the NIST 2002 Chinese-English development set
(Ayan et al., 2005). The set is annotated with sure S
and possible P alignments. We measure alignment
quality using alignment error rate (AER) (Och and
Ney, 2000).
We train the models on 10,000 sentences of FBIS
Chinese-English newswire. This is not a large-scale
experiment, but large enough to be relevant for lowresource languages. LBFGS experiments are not
provided because computing expectations in these
models is too computationally intensive to run for
many iterations. Hence, EM training is a more appropriate optimization approach: computing the Mstep gradient requires only summing over word type
pairs, while the marginal likelihood gradient needed
for LBFGS requires summing over training sentence
alignments. The ﬁnal alignments, in both the baseline and the feature-enhanced models, are computed
by training the generative models in both directions,
namic training approach—but provides no experiments.

combining the result with hard union competitive
thresholding (DeNero and Klein, 2007), and using agreement training for the HMM (Liang et al.,
2006). The combination of these techniques yields
a state-of-the-art unsupervised baseline for ChineseEnglish.
6.4

Word Alignment Results

For both IBM Model 1 and the HMM alignment
model, EM training with feature-enhanced models
outperforms the standard multinomial models, by
2.4 and 3.8 AER respectively.6 As expected, large
positive weights are assigned to both the dictionary
and edit distance features. Stem and character features also contribute to the performance gain.

7

Word Segmentation

Finally, we show that it is possible to improve upon
the simple and effective word segmentation model
presented in Liang and Klein (2009) by adding
phonological features. Unsupervised word segmentation is the task of identifying word boundaries in
sentences where spaces have been removed. For a
sequence of characters y = (y1 , ..., yn ), a segmentation is a sequence of segments z = (z1 , ..., z|z| )
such that z is a partition of y and each zi is a contiguous subsequence of y. Unsupervised models for
this task infer word boundaries from corpora of sentences of characters without ever seeing examples of
well-formed words.
7.1

Unigram Double-Exponential Model

Liang and Klein’s (2009) unigram doubleexponential model corresponds to a simple
derivational process where sentences of characters
x are generated a word at a time, drawn from a
multinomial over all possible strings θz,SEGMENT .
For this type, there is no context and the decision is
the particular string generated. In order to avoid the
degenerate MLE that assigns mass only to single
segment sentences it is helpful to independently
generate a length for each segment from a ﬁxed
distribution. Liang and Klein (2009) constrain individual segments to have maximum length 10 and
generate lengths from the following distribution:
6

The best published results for this dataset are supervised,
and trained on 17 times more data (Haghighi et al., 2009).

θl,LENGTH = exp(−l1.6 ) when 1 ≤ l ≤ 10. Their
model is deﬁcient since it is possible to generate
lengths that are inconsistent with the actual lengths
of the generated segments. The likelihood equation
is given by:
P (Y = y, Z = z) =
|z|

(1 − θSTOP ) θzi ,SEGMENT exp(−|zi |1.6 )

θSTOP
i=1

7.2

Segmentation Data and Evaluation

We train and test on the phonetic version of the
Bernstein-Ratner corpus (1987). This is the same
set-up used by Liang and Klein (2009), Goldwater
et al. (2006), and Johnson and Goldwater (2009).
This corpus consists of 9790 child-directed utterances transcribed using a phonetic representation.
We measure segment F1 score on the entire corpus.
We run all word segmentation models for 300 iterations with 10 random initializations and report the
mean and standard deviation of F1 in Table 1.
7.3

Segmentation Features

The SEGMENT multinomial is the important distribution in this model. We use the following features:
BASIC:
L ENGTH:
N UMBER -VOWELS:
P HONO -C LASS -P REF:
P HONO -C LASS -P REF:

1(z = ·)
1(length(z) = ·)
1(numVowels(z) = ·)
1(preﬁx(coarsePhonemes(z)) = ·)
1(sufﬁx(coarsePhonemes(z)) = ·)

The phonological class preﬁx and sufﬁx features
project each phoneme of a string to a coarser class
and then take preﬁx and sufﬁx indicators on the
string of projected characters. We include two versions of these features that use projections with different levels of coarseness. The goal of these features is to help the model learn general phonetic
shapes that correspond to well-formed word boundaries.
As is the case in general for our method, the
feature-enhanced unigram model still respects the
conditional independence assumptions that the standard unigram model makes, and inference is still
performed using a simple dynamic program to compute expected sufﬁcient statistics, which are just segment counts.

7.4

Segmentation Results

To our knowledge our system achieves the best performance to date on the Bernstein-Ratner corpus,
with an F1 of 88.0. It is substantially simpler than
the non-parametric Bayesian models proposed by
Johnson et al. (2007), which require sampling procedures to perform inference and achieve an F1 of
87 (Johnson and Goldwater, 2009). Similar to our
other results, the direct gradient approach outperforms EM for feature-enhanced models, and both
approaches outperform the baseline, which achieves
an F1 of 76.9.

8

Conclusion

We have shown that simple, locally normalized
models can effectively incorporate features into unsupervised models. These enriched models can
be easily optimized using standard NLP building blocks. Beyond the four tasks explored in
this paper—POS tagging, DMV grammar induction, word alignment, and word segmentation—the
method can be applied to many other tasks, for example grounded semantics, unsupervised PCFG induction, document clustering, and anaphora resolution.

Acknowledgements
We thank Percy Liang for making his word segmentation code available to us, and the anonymous reviewers for their comments.

Appendix: Optimization
In this section, we derive the gradient of the log marginal likelihood needed for the direct gradient approach. Let w0 be the current weights in Algorithm 2 and e = e(w0 ) be the expectations
under these weights as computed in Equation 2. In order to justify Algorithm 2, we need to prove that L(w0 ) =
(w0 , e).
We use the following simple lemma: if φ, ψ are real-valued
functions such that: (1) φ(w0 ) = ψ(w0 ) for some w0 ; (2)
φ(w) ≤ ψ(w) on an open set containing w0 ; and (3), φ and ψ
are differentiable at w0 ; then ψ(w0 ) = φ(wP
0 ).
We set ψ(w) = L(w) and φ(w) = (w, e)− z Pw0 (Z =
z|Y = y) log Pw0 (Z = z|Y = y). If we can show that ψ, φ
satisfy the conditions of the lemma we are done since the second
term of φ depends on w0 , but not on w.
Property (3) can be easily checked, and property (2) follows
from Jensen’s inequality. Finally, property (1) follows from
Lemma 2 of Neal and Hinton (1998).

References
N. F. Ayan, B. Dorr, and C. Monz. 2005. Combining
word alignments using neural networks. In Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing.
N. Bernstein-Ratner. 1987. The phonology of parentchild speech. K. Nelson and A. van Kleeck.
M. Bisani and H. Ney. 2008. Joint-sequence models for
grapheme-to-phoneme conversion.
A. Bouchard-Cˆ t´ , P. Liang, D. Klein, and T. L. Grifﬁths.
oe
2008. A probabilistic approach to language change.
In Neural Information Processing Systems.
P. F. Brown, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, and
R. L. Mercer. 1994. The mathematics of statistical
machine translation: Parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics.
S. F. Chen. 2003. Conditional and joint models for
grapheme-to-phoneme conversion. In Eurospeech.
S. B. Cohen and N. A. Smith. 2009. Shared logistic normal distributions for soft parameter tying in unsupervised grammar induction. In North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. 1977.
Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM
algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological).
J. DeNero and D. Klein. 2007. Tailoring word alignments to syntactic machine translation. In Association
for Computational Linguistics.
D. Elworthy. 1994. Does Baum-Welch re-estimation
help taggers? In Association for Computational Linguistics.
S. Goldwater and T. L. Grifﬁths. 2007. A fully Bayesian
approach to unsupervised part-of-speech tagging. In
Association for Computational Linguistics.
S. Goldwater, T. L. Grifﬁths, and M. Johnson. 2006.
Contextual dependencies in unsupervised word segmentation. In International Conference on Computational Linguistics/Association for Computational Linguistics.
A. Haghighi and D. Klein. 2006. Prototype-driven learning for sequence models. In Association for Computational Linguistics.
A. Haghighi, J. Blitzer, J. DeNero, and D. Klein. 2009.
Better word alignments with supervised ITG models.
In Association for Computational Linguistics.
M. Johnson and S. Goldwater. 2009. Improving nonparametric Bayesian inference: Experiments on unsupervised word segmentation with adaptor grammars.
In North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
M. Johnson, T. L. Grifﬁths, and S. Goldwater. 2007.
Adaptor grammars: a framework for specifying compositional nonparametric Bayesian models. In Neural
Information Processing Systems.

M. Johnson. 2007. Why doesnt EM ﬁnd good HMM
POS-taggers? In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing/Computational Natural Language
Learning.
D. Klein and C. D. Manning. 2004. Corpus-based induction of syntactic structure: Models of dependency
and constituency. In Association for Computational
Linguistics.
P. Liang and D. Klein. 2009. Online EM for unsupervised models. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
P. Liang, B. Taskar, and D. Klein. 2006. Alignment by
agreement. In North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
D. C. Liu, J. Nocedal, and C. Dong. 1989. On the limited
memory BFGS method for large scale optimization.
Mathematical Programming.
M. P. Marcus, M. A. Marcinkiewicz, and B. Santorini.
1993. Building a large annotated corpus of English:
the penn treebank. Computational Linguistics.
B. Merialdo. 1994. Tagging English text with a probabilistic model. Computational Linguistics.
R. Neal and G. E. Hinton. 1998. A view of the EM
algorithm that justiﬁes incremental, sparse, and other
variants. In Learning in Graphical Models. Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
H. Ney and S. Vogel. 1996. HMM-based word alignment
in statistical translation. In International Conference
on Computational Linguistics.
F. J. Och and H. Ney. 2000. Improved statistical alignment models. In Association for Computational Linguistics.
R. Salakhutdinov, S. Roweis, and Z. Ghahramani. 2003.
Optimization with EM and expectation-conjugategradient. In International Conference on Machine
Learning.
N. A. Smith and J. Eisner. 2005. Contrastive estimation:
Training log-linear models on unlabeled data. In Association for Computational Linguistics.
N. A. Smith and M. Johnson. 2007. Weighted and probabilistic context-free grammars are equally expressive.
Computational Linguistics.
I. G. Varea, F. J. Och, H. Ney, and F. Casacuberta. 2002.
Reﬁned lexicon models for statistical machine translation using a maximum entropy approach. In Association for Computational Linguistics.
N. Xue, F-D Chiou, and M. Palmer. 2002. Building a
large-scale annotated Chinese corpus. In International
Conference on Computational Linguistics.

