Multi-Modal Models for Concrete and Abstract Concept Meaning

Felix Hill
Roi Reichart
Anna Korhonen
Computer Laboratory
Technion - IIT
Computer Laboratory
University of Cambridge
Haifa, Israel
University of Cambridge
fh295@cam.ac.uk roiri@ie.technion.ac.il alk23@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
Multi-modal models that learn semantic representations from both linguistic and perceptual input outperform language-only models
on a range of evaluations, and better reﬂect
human concept acquisition. Most perceptual
input to such models corresponds to concrete
noun concepts and the superiority of the multimodal approach has only been established
when evaluating on such concepts. We therefore investigate which concepts can be effectively learned by multi-modal models. We
show that concreteness determines both which
linguistic features are most informative and
the impact of perceptual input in such models. We then introduce ridge regression as
a means of propagating perceptual information from concrete nouns to more abstract concepts that is more robust than previous approaches. Finally, we present weighted gram
matrix combination, a means of combining
representations from distinct modalities that
outperforms alternatives when both modalities
are sufﬁciently rich.

1

Introduction

What information is needed to learn the meaning of
a word? Children learning words are exposed to a
diverse mix of information sources. These include
clues in the language itself, such as nearby words or
speaker intention, but also what the child perceives
about the world around it when the word is heard.
Learning the meaning of words requires not only
a sensitivity to both linguistic and perceptual input,
but also the ability to process and combine information from these modalities in a productive way.

Many computational semantic models represent
words as real-valued vectors, encoding their relative frequency of occurrence in particular forms and
contexts in linguistic corpora (Sahlgren, 2006; Turney et al., 2010). Motivated both by parallels with
human language acquisition and by evidence that
many word meanings are grounded in the perceptual system (Barsalou et al., 2003), recent research
has explored the integration into text-based models
of input that approximates the visual or other sensory modalities (Silberer and Lapata, 2012; Bruni
et al., 2014). Such models can learn higher-quality
semantic representations than conventional corpusonly models, as evidenced by a range of evaluations.
However, the majority of perceptual input for the
models in these studies corresponds directly to concrete noun concepts, such as chocolate or cheeseburger, and the superiority of the multi-modal over
the corpus-only approach has only been established
when evaluations include such concepts (Leong and
Mihalcea, 2011; Bruni et al., 2012; Roller and
Schulte im Walde, 2013; Silberer and Lapata, 2012).
It is thus unclear if the multi-modal approach is effective for more abstract words, such as guilt or obesity. Indeed, since empirical evidence indicates differences in the representational frameworks of both
concrete and abstract concepts (Paivio, 1991; Hill et
al., 2013), and verb and noun concepts (Markman
and Wisniewski, 1997), perceptual information may
not fulﬁll the same role in the representation of the
various concept types. This potential challenge to
the multi-modal approach is of particular practical
importance since concrete nouns constitute only a
small proportion of the open-class, meaning-bearing

words in everyday language (Section 2).
In light of these considerations, this paper addresses three questions: (1) Which information
sources (modalities) are important for acquiring
concepts of different types? (2) Can perceptual input be propagated effectively from concrete to more
abstract words? (3) What is the best way to combine
information from the different sources?
We construct models that acquire semantic representations for four sets of concepts: concrete nouns,
abstract nouns, concrete verbs and abstract verbs.
The linguistic input to the models comes from the
recently released Google Syntactic N-Grams Corpus
(Goldberg and Orwant, 2013), from which a selection of linguistic features are extracted. Perceptual
input is approximated by data from the McRae et
al. (2005) norms, which encode perceptual properties of concrete nouns, and the ESPGame dataset
(Von Ahn and Dabbish, 2004), which contains manually generated descriptions of 100,000 images.
To address (1) we extract representations for
each concept type from combinations of information
sources. We ﬁrst focus on different classes of linguistic features, before extending our models to the
multi-modal context. While linguistic information
overall effectively reﬂects the meaning of all concept types, we show that features encoding syntactic patterns are only valuable for the acquisition of
abstract concepts. On the other hand, perceptual information, whether directly encoded or propagated
through the model, plays a more important role in
the representation of concrete concepts.
In addressing (2), we propose ridge regression
(Myers, 1990) as a means of propagating features
from concrete nouns to more abstract concepts. The
regularization term in ridge regression encourages
solutions that generalize well across concept types.
We show that ridge regression effectively propagates
perceptual information to abstract nouns and concrete verbs, and is overall preferable to both linear regression and the method of Johns and Jones
(2012) applied to a similar task by Silberer and Lapata (2012). However, for all propagation methods,
the impact of integrating perceptual information depends on the concreteness of the target concepts. Indeed, for abstract verbs, the most abstract concept
type in our evaluations, perceptual input actually degrades representation quality. This highlights the

need to consider the concreteness of the target domain when constructing multi-modal models.
To address (3), we present various means of combining information from different modalities. We
propose weighted gram matrix combination, a technique in which representations of distinct modalities
are mapped to a space of common dimension where
coordinates reﬂect proximity to other concepts. This
transformation, which has been shown to enhance
semantic representations in the context of verbclustering (Reichart and Korhonen, 2013), reduces
representation sparsity and facilitates a productbased combination that results in greater inter-modal
dependency. Weighted gram matrix combination
outperforms alternatives such as concatenation and
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) (Hardoon et
al., 2004) when combining representations from two
similarly rich information sources.
In Section 3, we present experiments with linguistic features designed to address question (1). These
analyses are extended to multi-modal models in Section 4, where we also address (2) and (3). We ﬁrst
discuss the relevance of concreteness and part-ofspeech (lexical function) to concept representation.

2

Concreteness and Word Meaning

A large and growing body of psychological evidence
indicates differences between abstract and concrete
concepts.1 It has been shown that concrete words
are more easily learned, remembered and processed
than abstract words (Paivio, 1991; Schwanenﬂugel
and Shoben, 1983), while neuroimaging studies
demonstrate differences in brain activity when subjects are presented with stimuli corresponding to the
two concept types (Binder et al., 2005).
The abstract/concrete distinction is important to
computational semantics for various reasons. While
many models construct representations of concrete
words (Andrews et al., 2009; Landauer and Dumais,
1997), abstract words are in fact far more common in
everyday language. For instance, based on an analysis of those noun concepts in the University of South
Florida dataset (USF) and their occurrence in the
British National Corpus (BNC) (Leech et al., 1994),
72% of noun tokens in corpora are rated by human
1

Here concreteness is understood intuitively, as per the psychological literature (Rosen, 2001; Gallese and Lakoff, 2005).

mood

Nouns

q
q
q

rule

praise

beam

clam

sardine

penguin

q

believe

enjoy

leave

look

stab

swing

Verbs

q

0

2

4

6

Average Concreteness Rating

Figure 1: Boxplot of concreteness distributions for noun and verb concepts in the USF data, with selected example
concepts. The bold vertical line is the mean, boxes extend from the ﬁrst to the third quartile, and dots represent outliers.

judges as more abstract than the noun war, a concept
that many would already consider quite abstract.2
The recent interest in multi-modal semantics further motivates a principled modelling approach to
lexical concreteness. Many multi-modal models implicitly distinguish concrete and abstract concepts
since their perceptual input corresponds only to concrete words (Bruni et al., 2012; Silberer and Lapata,
2012; Roller and Schulte im Walde, 2013). However, given that many abstract concepts express relations or modiﬁcations of concrete concepts (Gentner and Markman, 1997), it is reasonable to expect
that perceptual information about concrete concepts
could also enhance the quality of more abstract representations in an appropriately constructed model.
Moreover, concreteness is closely related to more
functional lexical distinctions, such as those between adjectives, nouns and verbs. An analysis
of the USF dataset, which includes concreteness
ratings for over 4,000 words collected from thousands of participants, indicates that on average verbs
(mean concreteness, 3.64) are considered more abstract than nouns (mean concreteness, 4.91), an effect illustrated in Figure 1. This connection between lexical function and concreteness suggests
that a sensitivity to concreteness could improve
models that already make principled distinctions between words based on their part-of-speech (POS)
(Im Walde, 2006; Baroni and Zamparelli, 2010).
Although the focus of this paper is on multimodal models, few conventional semantic models make principled distinctions between concepts
based on function or concreteness. Before turning
to the multi-modal case, we thus investigate whether
2

This sample covers 15.2% of all noun tokens in the BNC.

these distinctions are pertinent to text-only models.

3

Concreteness and Linguistic Features

It has long been known that aspects of word meaning
can be inferred from nearby words in corpora. Approaches that exploit this fact are often called distributional models (Sahlgren, 2006; Turney et al.,
2010). We take a distributional approach to learning linguistic representations. The advantage of using distributional methods to learn representations
from corpora versus approaches that rely on knowledge bases (Pedersen et al., 2004; Leong and Mihalcea, 2011) is that they are more scalable, easily
applicable across languages and plausibly reﬂect the
process of human word learning (Landauer and Dumais, 1997; Grifﬁths et al., 2007). We group distributional features into three classes to test which
forms of linguistic information are most pertinent to
the abstract/concrete and verb/noun distinctions.
All features are extracted from The Google
Syntactic N-grams Corpus. The dataset contains
counted dependency-tree fragments for over 10bn
words of the English Google Books Corpus.
3.1

Feature Classes

Lexical Features Our lexical features are the cooccurrence counts of a concept word with each of
the other 2,529 concepts in the USF data. Cooccurrences are counted in a 5-word window, and, as
elsewhere (Erk and Pad´ , 2008), weighted by pointo
wise mutual information (PMI) to control for the underlying frequency of both concept and word.
POS-tag Features Many words function as more
than one POS, and this variation can be indicative of
meaning (Manning, 2011). For example, deverbal

Noun
Concepts

Verb
Concepts

Context
indirect object
direct object
subject
in PP
adject. modiﬁer
inﬁnitive clause
transitive
intransitive
distransitive
phrasal verb
inﬁnitival comp.
clausal comp.

Example
gave it to the man
gave the pie to him
the man grinned
was in his mouth
the portly man
to eat is human
he bit the steak
he salivated
put jam on the toast
he gobbled it up
he wants to snooze
I bet he won’t diet

Table 1: Grammatical features for noun/verb concepts

nouns, such as shiver or walk, often refer to processes rather than entities. To capture such effects,
we count the frequency of occurrence with the POS
categories ajdective, adverb, noun and verb.
Grammatical Features Grammatical role is a
strong predictor of semantics (Gildea and Jurafsky,
2002). For instance, the subject of transitive verbs
is more likely to refer to an animate entity than a
noun chosen at random. Syntactic context also predicts verb semantics (Kipper et al., 2008). We thus
count the frequency of nouns in a range of (nonlexicalized) syntactic contexts, and of verbs in one
of the six most common subcategorization-frame
classes as deﬁned in Van de Cruys et al. (2012).
These contexts are detailed in Table 1.
3.2

Evaluation Sets

We create evaluation sets of abstract and concrete concepts, and introduce a complementary dichotomy between nouns and verbs, the two POS categories most fundamental to propositional meaning.
To construct these sets, we extract nouns and verbs
from word pairs in the USF data based on their majority POS-tag in the lemmatized BNC (Leech et al.,
1994), excluding any word not assigned to either of
the POS categories in more than 70% of instances.
From the resulting 2175 nouns and 354 verbs, the
abstract-concrete distinction is drawn by ordering
words according to concreteness and sampling at
random from the ﬁrst and fourth quartiles. Any concrete nouns not occurring in the McRae et al. (2005)
Property Norm dataset were also excluded.

Concept Type
concrete nouns
abstract nouns
all nouns
concrete verbs
abstract verbs
all verbs

Words
303
100
403
50
50
100

Pairs
1280
295
1716
66
127
221

Examples
yacht, cup
fear, respect
cup, respect
kiss, launch
differ, obey
kiss, differ

Table 2: Evaluation sets used throughout. All nouns and
all verbs are the union of abstract and concrete subsets
and mixed abstract-concrete or concrete-abstract pairs.

For each list of concepts L = concrete nouns,
concrete verbs, abstract nouns, abstract verbs, together with lists all nouns and all verbs, a corresponding set of pairs {(w1 , w2 ) ∈ U SF : w1 , w2 ∈
L} is deﬁned for evaluation. These details are summarized in Table 2. Evaluation lists, sets of pairs and
USF scores are downloadable from our website.

3.3

Evaluation Methodology

All models are evaluated by measuring correlations
with the free-association scores in the USF dataset
(Nelson et al., 2004). This dataset contains the freeassociation strength of over 150,000 word pairs.3
These data reﬂect the cognitive proximity of concepts and have been widely used in NLP as a goldstandard for computational models (Andrews et al.,
2009; Feng and Lapata, 2010; Silberer and Lapata,
2012; Roller and Schulte im Walde, 2013).
For evaluation pairs (c1 , c2 ) we calculate the cosine similarity between our learned feature representations for c1 and c2 , a standard measure of the proximity of two vectors (Turney et al., 2010), and follow
previous studies (Leong and Mihalcea, 2011; Huang
et al., 2012) in using Spearman’s ρ as a measure
of correlation between these values and our goldstandard.4 All representations in this section are
combined by concatenation, since the present focus
is not on combination methods.5
3

Free-association strength is measured by presenting subjects with a cue word and asking them to produce the ﬁrst word
they can think of that is associated with that cue word.
4
We consider Spearman’s ρ, a non-parametric ranking correlation, to be more appropriate than Pearson’s r for free association data, which is naturally skewed and non-continuous.
5
When combining multiple representations we normalize

Feature Type
(1) Lexical
(2) POS-tag
(3) Grammatical
(1)+(2)+(3)

All Nouns
0.168*
0.059*
0.078*
0.182 *

Conc. Nouns
0.199*
0.012
0.027
0.181*

Abs. Nouns
0.248*
0.119*
0.121*
0.247*

All Verbs
0.173*
0.052
0.009
0.172*

Conc. Verbs
0.268*
-0.074
-0.017
0.267*

Abs. Verbs
0.109
0.123
0.114
0.108

Table 3: Spearman correlation ρ of cosine similarity between vector representations derived from three feature classes
with USF scores. * indicates statistically signiﬁcant correlations (p < 0.05 ).

3.4

Results

The performance of each feature class on the evaluation sets is detailed in Table 3. When all linguistic features are included, performance is somewhat
better on noun concepts (ρ = 0.182) than verbs
(ρ = 0.172). However, while correlations are signiﬁcant on concrete (ρ = 0.181) and abstract nouns
(ρ = 0.247) and concrete verbs, the effect is not
signiﬁcant on abstract verbs (although it is on verbs
overall). The highest correlations for the linguistic
features together are on abstract nouns (ρ = 0.247)
and concrete verbs (ρ = 0.267). Referring back to
the continuum in Figure 1, it is possible that there
is an optimum concreteness level, exhibited by abstract nouns and concrete verbs, at which conceptual
meaning is best captured by linguistic models.
The results indicate that the three feature classes
convey distinct information. It is perhaps unsurprising that lexical features produce the best performance in the majority of cases; the value of lexical
co-occurrence statistics in conveying word meaning
is expressed in the well known distributional hypothesis (Harris, 1954). More interestingly, on abstract concepts the contribution of POS-tag (nouns,
ρ = 0.119; verbs, ρ = 0.123 ) and grammatical
features (nouns, ρ = 0.121; verbs, ρ = 0.114) is notably higher than on the corresponding concrete concepts. The importance of such features to modelling
free-association between abstract concepts suggests
that they may convey information about how concepts are (subjectively) organized and interrelated in
the minds of language users, independent of their
realisation in the physical world. Indeed, since abstract representations rely to a lesser extent than concrete representations on perceptual input (Section 4),
it is perhaps unsurprising that more of their meaning
is reﬂected in subtle linguistic patterns.
The results in this section demonstrate that differeach representation, then concatenate and then renormalize.

ent information is required to learn representations
for abstract and concrete concepts and for noun and
verb concepts. In the next section, we investigate
how perceptual information ﬁts into this equation.

4

Acquiring Multi-Modal Representations

As noted in Section 2, there is experimental evidence that perceptual information plays a distinct
role in the representation of different concept types.
We explore whether this ﬁnding extends to computational models by integrating such information
into our corpus-based approaches. We focus on
two aspects of the integration process. Propagation: Can models infer useful information about abstract nouns and verbs from perceptual information
corresponding to concrete nouns? And combination: How can linguistic and (propagated or actual)
perceptual information be integrated into a single,
multi-modal representation? We begin by introducing the two sources of perceptual information.
4.1

Perceptual Information Sources

The McRae Dataset The McRae et al. (2005)
Property Norms dataset is commonly used as a perceptual information source in cognitively-motivated
semantic models (Kelly et al., 2010; Roller and
Schulte im Walde, 2013). The dataset contains properties of over 500 concrete noun concepts produced
by 30 human annotators. The proportion of subjects producing each property gives a measure of the
strength of that property for a given concept. We encode this data in vectors with coordinates for each of
the 2,526 properties in the dataset. A concept representation contains (real-valued) feature strengths
in places corresponding to the features of that concept and zeros elsewhere. Having deﬁned the concrete noun evaluation set as the 303 concepts found
in both the USF and McRae datasets, this information is available for all concrete nouns.

The ESP-Game Dataset To complement the
cognitively-driven McRae data with a more explicitly visual information source, we also extract information from the ESP-Game dataset (Von Ahn and
Dabbish, 2004) of 100,000 photographs, each annotated with a list of entities depicted in that image. This input enables connections to be made between concepts that co-occur in scenes, and thus
might be experienced together by language learners at a given time. Because we want our models
to reﬂect human concept learning in inferring conceptual knowledge from comparatively unstructured
data, we use the ESP-Game dataset in preference to
resources such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009), in
which the conceptual hierarchy is directly encoded
by expert annotators. An additional motivation is
that ESP-Game was produced by crowdsourcing a
simple task with untrained annotators, and thus represents a more scalable class of data source.
We represent the ESP-Game data in 100,000 dimensional vectors, with co-ordinates corresponding
to each image in the dataset. A concept representation contains a 1 in any place that corresponds to an
image in which the concept appears, and a 0 otherwise. Although it is possible to portray actions and
processes in static images, and several of the ESPGame images are annotated with verb concepts, for a
cleaner analysis of the information propagation process we only include ESP input in our models for the
concrete nouns in the evaluation set.
The data encoding outlined above results in perceptual representations of dimension ≈ 100, 000,
for which, on average, fewer than 0.5% of entries are
non-zero 6 . In contrast, in our full linguistic representations of nouns (dimension ≈ 4, 000) and verbs
(dimension ≈ 8, 000) (Section 3), an average of 24%
of entries are non-zero. One of the challenges for the
propagation and combination methods described in
the following subsections is therefore to manage the
differences in dimension and sparsity between linguistic and perceptual representations.
4.2

Information Propagation

Johns and Jones Silberer and Lapata (2012) apply a method designed by Johns and Jones (2012) to
6

The ESP-Game and McRae representations are of approximately equal sparsity.

infer quasi-perceptual representations for a concept
in the case that actual perceptual information is not
available. Translating their approach to the present
context, for verbs and abstract nouns we infer quasiperceptual representations based on the perceptual
features of concrete nouns that are nearby in the semantic space deﬁned by the linguistic features.
In the ﬁrst step of their two-step method, for each
abstract noun or verb k, a quasi-perceptual representation is computed as an average of the perceptual
representations of the concrete nouns, weighted by
the proximity between these nouns and k
kp =

S(kl , cl )λ · cp
¯
c∈C

¯
where C is the set of concrete nouns, cp and kp are
the perceptual representations for c and k respectively, and cl and kl the linguistic representations.
The exponent parameter λ reﬂects the learning rate.
Following Johns and Jones (2012), we deﬁne the
proximity function S between noun concepts to be
cosine similarity. However, because our verb and
noun representations are of different dimension, we
take verb-noun proximity to be the PMI between
the two words in the corpus, with co-occurrences
counted within a 5-word window.
In step two, the initial quasi-perceptual representations are inferred for a second time, but with the
weighted average calculated over the perceptual or
initial quasi-perceptual representations of all other
words, not just concrete nouns. As with Johns and
Jones (2012), we set the learning rate parameter λ to
be 3 in the ﬁrst step and 13 in the second.
Ridge Regression As an alternative propagation
method we propose ridge regression (Myers, 1990).
Ridge regression is a variant of least squares regression in which a regularization term is added to
the training objective to favor solutions with certain properties. Here we apply it to learn parameters for linear maps from linguistic representations
of concrete nouns to features in their perceptual representations. For concepts with perceptual representations of dimension np , we learn np linear functions
fi : Rnl → R that map the linguistic representations
(of dimension nl ) to a particular perceptual feature
i. These functions are then applied together to map

the linguistic representations of abstract nouns and
verbs to full quasi-perceptual representations.7
As our model is trained on concrete nouns but
applied to other concept types, we do not wish the
mapping to reﬂect the training data too faithfully.
To mitigate against this we deﬁne our regularization term as the Euclidian l2 norm of the inferred
parameter vector. This term ensures that the regression favors lower coefﬁcients and a smoother solution function, which should provide better generalization performance than simple linear regression.
The objective for learning the fi is then to minimize
aX −

Yi 2
2

+ a

2
2

where a is the vector of regression coefﬁcients, X is
a matrix of linguistic representations and Yi a vector
of perceptual feature i for the set of concrete nouns.
We now investigate ways in which the (quasi-)
perceptual representations acquired via these methods can be combined with linguistic representations.
4.3

Information Combination

Canonical Correlation Analysis Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) (Hardoon et al., 2004) is
an established statistical method for exploring relationships between two sets of random variables.
The method determines a linear transformation of
the space spanned by each of the sets of variables,
such that the correlations between the sets of transformed variables is maximized.
Silberer and Lapata (2012) apply CCA in the
present context of information fusion, with one set
of random variables corresponding to perceptual
features and another corresponding to linguistic features. Applied in this way, CCA provides a mechanism for reducing the dimensionality of the linguistic and perceptual representations such that the important interactions between them are preserved.8
The transformed linguistic and perceptual vectors
are then concatenated. We follow Silberer and Lapata by applying a kernalized variant of CCA.9
7

Because the POS-tag and grammatical features are different for nouns and for verbs, we exclude them from our linguistic
representations when implementing ridge regression.
8
Dimensionality reduction is desirable in the present context
because of the sparsity of our perceptual representations.
9
The
KernelCCA
package
in
Python:
http://pythonhosted.org/apgl/KernelCCA.html

Weighted Gram Matrix Combination The
method we propose as an alternative means of
fusing linguistic and extra-linguistic information is
weighted gram matrix combination, which derives
from an information combination technique applied
to verb clustering by Reichart and Korhonen (2013).
For a set of concepts C = {c1 , . . . , cn } with
representations {r1 , . . . , rn }, the method involves
creating an n × n weighted gram matrix L in which
Lij = S(ri , rj ) · φ(ri ) · φ(rj ).
Here, S is again a similarity function (we use cosine
similarity), and φ(r) is the quality score of r.
The quality scoring function φ can be any mapping Rn → R that reﬂects the importance of a concept relative to other concepts in C. In the present
context, we follow Reichart and Korhonen (2013) in
deﬁning a quality score φ as the average cosine similarity of a concept with all other concepts in C
1
φ(rj ) =
n

n

S(ri , rj ).
i=1

For cj ∈ C, the matrix L then encodes a scalar projection of rj onto the other members ri≤n , weighted
by their quality. Each word representation in the set
is thus mapped into a new space of dimension n determined by the concepts in C.
Converting concept representations to weighted
gram matrix form has several advantages in the
present context. First, both when evaluating and
applying semantic representations, we generally require models to determine relations between concepts relative to others. We might, for instance, require close associates of a given word, a selection of
potential synonyms, or the two most similar search
queries in a given set. This relative nature of semantics is reﬂected by projecting representations into
a space deﬁned by the set of concepts themselves,
rather than low-level features. It is also captured by
the quality weighting, which lends primacy to concept dimensions that are central to the space.
Second, mapping representations of different dimension into vector spaces of equal dimension results in dense representations of equal dimension for
each modality. This naturally lends equal weighting
or status to each modality and resolves any issues

Abstract Nouns (JJ)

Performance Change

Concrete Verbs (JJ)

Lexical

Concrete Nouns

Lexical

Abstract Verbs (JJ)

0.2
0.1
0.0
−0.1

Lexical

POS

Grammatical

Feature Class

POS Grammatical

Perceptual Information Source

McRae

ESP

POS Grammatical

Lexical

POS Grammatical

McRae & ESP

Figure 2: Additive change in Spearman’s ρ when representations acquired from particular classes of linguistic features
are combined with (actual or inferred) perceptual representations. Perceptual representations are derived from either
the McRae Dataset, the ESP-Game Dataset or both (concatenated). For concepts other than concrete nouns, perceptual
information is propagated using the Johns and Jones (JJ) method, and combined with simple concatenation.

of representations sparsity. In addition, the dimension equality in particular enables a wider range of
mathematical operations for combining information
sources. Here, we follow Reichart and Korhonen
(2013) in taking the product of the linguistic and perceptual weighted gram matrices L and P , producing a new matrix containing fused representations
for each concept
M = LP P L.
By taking the composite product LP P L rather than
LP or P L, M is symmetric and no ad hoc status is
conferred to one modality over the other.

4.4

Results

The experiments in this section were designed to address the three questions speciﬁed in Section 1: (1)
Which information sources are important for acquiring word concepts of different types? (2) Can perceptual information be propagated from concrete to
abstract concepts? (3) What is the best way to combine the information from the different sources?
Question (1) To build on insights from Section
3, we ﬁrst examined how perceptual input interacts
with the three classes of linguistic features deﬁned
there. Figure 2 shows the additive difference in correlation between (i) models in which perceptual and
particular linguistic features are concatenated and
(ii) models based on just the linguistic features.

For concrete nouns and concrete verbs, (actual
or inferred) perceptual information was beneﬁcial
in almost all cases. The largest improvement for
both concept types was over grammatical features,
achieved by including only the McRae data. This
signals from this perceptual input and the grammatical features clearly reﬂect complementary aspects
of the meaning of these concepts. We hypothesize that grammatical features (and POS features,
which also perform strongly in this combination)
confer information to concrete representations about
the function and mutual interaction of concepts (the
most ‘relational’ aspects of their meaning (Gentner,
1978)) which complements the more intrinsic properties conferred by perceptual features.
For abstract concepts, it is perhaps unsurprising that the overall contribution of perceptual information was smaller. Indeed, combining linguistic and perceptual information actually harmed performance on abstract verbs in all cases. For these
concepts, the inferred perceptual features seem to
obscure or contradict some of the information conveyed in the linguistic representations.
While the McRae data was clearly the most valuable source of perceptual input for concrete nouns
and concrete verbs, for abstract nouns the combination of ESP-Game and McRae data was most informative. Both inspection of the data and cognitive theories (Rosch et al., 1976) suggest that entities identiﬁed in scenes, as in the ESP-Game dataset,
generally correspond to a particular (basic) level of

Model
Linguistic
(JJ)+Concat
(JJ)+CCA
(JJ)+WGM
RR+Concat
RR+CCA
RR+WGM
LR+

All Nouns

Conc. Nouns†

Abs. Nouns

All Verbs

Conc. Verbs

Abs. Verbs

0.175 — 0.335
0.116 — 0.375
0.082 — 0.021
0.098 — 0.213
0.232 — 0.432
0.033 — -0.045
0.094 — 0.069
0.216 — 0.402

0.169 — 0.317
0.258 — 0.442
0.001 — 0.067
0.397 — 0.523

0.233 — 0.344
0.190 — 0.267
0.085 — -0.018
0.238 — 0.329
0.248 — 0.343
0.044 — -0.023
0.232 — 0.327
0.216 — 0.282

0.148 — 0.178
0.129 — 0.162
0.027— 0.213
0.059 — 0.169
0.013 — 0.212
0.001 — -0.006
0.159 — 0.131
0.004 — 0.051

0.204 — 0.191
0.301 — 0.062
0.079 — 0.276
0.253 — 0.064
0.046 — 0.484
0.018 — 0.344
0.244 — 0.194
-0.051 — 0.139

0.094 — 0.330
0.019 — 0.280
0.095 — 0.200
-0.080 — 0.254
0.023 — 0.133
0.018 — 0.085
0.075 — 0.283
-0.008 — 0.197

Table 4: Performance of different methods of information propagation (JJ = Johns and Jones, RR = ridge regression,
LR = linear regression) and combination (Concat = concatenation, CCA = canonical correlation analysis, WGM =
weighted gram matrix multiplication) across evaluation sets. Values are Spearman’s ρ correlation with USF scores
(left hand side of columns) and WordNet path similarity (right hand side). For the LR baseline we only report the
highest score across the three combination types. †No propagation takes place for concrete nouns; this column reﬂects
the performance of combination methods only.

the conceptual hierarchy. The ESP-Game data reﬂects relations between these basic-level concepts
in the world, whereas the McRae data typically describes their (intrinsic) properties. Together, these
sources seem to combine information on the properties of, and relations between, concepts in a way that
particularly facilitates the learning of abstract nouns.
Question (2) The performance of different methods of information propagation and combination is
presented in Table 4. The underlying linguistic representations in this case contained all three distributional feature classes. For more robust conclusions,
in addition to the USF gold-standard we also measured the correlation between model output and the
WordNet path similarity of words in our evaluation
pairs. The path similarity between words w1 and w2
is the shortest distance between synsets of w1 and w2
in the WordNet taxonomy (Fellbaum, 1999), which
correlates signiﬁcantly with human judgements of
concept similarity (Pedersen et al., 2004).10
The correlations with the USF data (left hand column, Table 4) of our linguistic-only models (ρ =
0.094 − 0.233) and best performing multi-modal
models (on both concrete nouns, ρ = 0.397, and
more abstract concepts, ρ = 0.095 − 0.301) were
higher than the best comparable models described
elsewhere (Feng and Lapata, 2010; Silberer and Lapata, 2012; Silberer et al., 2013).11 This conﬁrms
10

Other widely-used evaluation gold-standards, such as
WordSim 353 and the MEN dataset, do not contain a sufﬁcient
number of abstract concepts for the current purpose.
11
Feng and Lapata (2010) report ρ = .08 for language-only

both that the underlying linguistic space is of high
quality and that the ESP and McRae perceptual input is similarly or more informative than the input
applied in previous work.
Consistent with previous studies, adding perceptual input improved the quality of concrete noun
representations as measured against both USF and
path similarity gold-standards. Further, effective information propagation was indeed possible for both
abstract nouns (USF evaluation) and concrete verbs
(both evaluations). Interestingly, however, this was
not the case for abstract verbs, for which no mix of
propagation and combination methods produced an
improvement on the linguistic-only model on either
evaluation set. Indeed, as shown in Figure 2, no type
of perceptual input generated an improvement in abstract verb representations, regardless of the underlying class of linguistic features.
This result underlines the link between concreteness, cognition and perception proposed in the psychological literature. More practically, it shows that
concreteness can determine if propagation of perceptual input will be effective and, if so, the potential
degree of improvement over text-only models.
Turning to means of propagation, both the Johns
and Jones method and ridge regression outperformed the linear regression baseline on the majority of concept types in our evaluation. Across the
ﬁve sets and ten evaluations on which propagation
and .12 for multi-modal models evaluated on USF over concrete
and abstract concepts. Silberer and Lapata (2012) report ρ =
.14 (language-only) and .35 (multi-modal) over concrete nouns.

takes place (All Nouns, Abstract Nouns, All Verbs,
Abstract Verbs and Concrete Verbs), ridge regression
performed more robustly, achieving the best performance on six evaluation sets compared to two for the
Johns and Jones method.12
Question (3) Weighted gram matrix multiplication (ρ = 0.397 on USF and ρ = 0.523 on path similarity) outperformed both simple vector concatenation (ρ = 0.258 and ρ = 0.442) and CCA (ρ =
0.001 and ρ = 0.067) on concrete nouns. In the
case of both abstract nouns and concrete verbs, however, the most effective means of combining quasiperceptual information with linguistic representations was concatenation (abstract nouns, ρ = 0.248
and ρ = 0.343, concrete verbs, ρ = 0.301 and
ρ = 0.484). One evident drawback of multiplicative methods such as weighted gram matrix combination is the greater inter-dependence of the information sources; a weak signal from one modality
can undermine the contribution of the other modality. We hypothesize that this underlines the comparatively poor performance of the method on verbs and
abstract nouns, as the perceptual input for concrete
nouns is clearly a richer information source than the
propagated features of more abstract concepts.

5

Conclusion

Motivated by the inherent difference between abstract and concrete concepts and the observation that
abstract words occur more frequently in language,
in this paper we have addressed the question of
whether multi-modal models can enhance semantic
representations of both concept types.
In Section 3, we demonstrated that different information sources are important for acquiring concrete
and abstract noun and verb concepts. Within the linguistic modality, while lexical features are informative for all concept types, syntactic features are only
signiﬁcantly informative for abstract concepts.
In contrast, in Section 4 we observed that perceptual input is a more valuable information source
for concrete concepts than abstract concepts. Nevertheless, perceptual input can be effectively propagated from concrete nouns to enhance representations of both abstract nouns and concrete verbs. In12

For these comparisons, the optimal combination method is
selected in each case.

deed, conceptual concreteness appears to determine
the degree to which perceptual input is beneﬁcial,
since representations of abstract verbs, the most abstract concepts in our experiments, were actually degraded by this additional information. One important contribution of this work is therefore an insight
into when multi-modal models should or should not
aim to combine and/or propagate perceptual input to
ensure that optimal representations are learned. In
this respect, our conclusions align with the ﬁndings
of Kiela and Hill (2014), who take an explicitly visual approach to resolving the same question.
Various methods for propagating and combining
perceptual information with linguistic input were
presented. We proposed ridge regression for inferring perceptual representations for abstract concepts, which proved more robust than alternatives
across the range of concept types. This approach is
particularly simple to implement, since it is based on
an established statistical prodedure. In addition, we
introduced weighted gram matrix combination for
combining representations from distinct modalities
of differing sparsity and dimension. This method
produces the highest quality composite representations for concrete nouns, where both modalities represent high quality information sources.
Overall, our results demonstrate that the potential
practical beneﬁts of multi-modal models extend beyond concrete domains into a signiﬁcant proportion
of the lexical concepts found in language. In future work we aim to extend our experiments to concept types such as adjectives and adverbs, and to develop models that further improve the propagation
and combination of extra-linguistic input.
Moreover, while we cannot draw deﬁnitive conclusions about human language processing, the effectiveness of the methods presented in this paper
offer tentative support for the idea that even abstract concepts are grounded in the perceptual system (Barsalou et al., 2003). As such, it may be that,
even in the more abstract cases of human communication, we ﬁnd ways to see what people mean precisely by ﬁnding ways to see what they mean.

Acknowledgements
We thank The Royal Society and St John’s College
for their support.

References
Mark Andrews, Gabriella Vigliocco, and David Vinson.
2009. Integrating experiential and distributional data
to learn semantic representations. Psychological Review, 116(3):463.
Marco Baroni and Roberto Zamparelli. 2010. Nouns
are vectors, adjectives are matrices: Representing
adjective-noun constructions in semantic space. In
Proceedings of the 2010 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
1183–1193. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Lawrence W Barsalou, W Kyle Simmons, Aron K Barbey, and Christine D Wilson. 2003. Grounding
conceptual knowledge in modality-speciﬁc systems.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 7(2):84–91.
Jeffrey R Binder, Chris F Westbury, Kristen A McKiernan, Edward T Possing, and David A Medler. 2005.
Distinct brain systems for processing concrete and abstract concepts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
17(6):905–917.
Elia Bruni, Gemma Boleda, Marco Baroni, and NamKhanh Tran. 2012. Distributional semantics in technicolor. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Long Papers-Volume 1, pages 136–145. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Elia Bruni, Nam Khanh Tran, and Marco Baroni. 2014.
Multimodal distributional semantics. Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 49:1–47.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li,
and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009, pages 248–255.
IEEE.
Katrin Erk and Sebastian Pad´ . 2008. A structured veco
tor space model for word meaning in context. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, pages 897–906. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Christiane Fellbaum. 1999. WordNet. Wiley Online Library.
Yansong Feng and Mirella Lapata. 2010. Visual information in semantic representation. In Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 91–99. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Vittorio Gallese and George Lakoff. 2005. The brain’s
concepts: The role of the sensory-motor system in conceptual knowledge. Cognitive neuropsychology, 22(34):455–479.

Dedre Gentner and Arthur B Markman. 1997. Structure
mapping in analogy and similarity. American psychologist, 52(1):45.
Dedre Gentner. 1978. On relational meaning: The acquisition of verb meaning. Child development, pages
988–998.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic labeling of semantic roles. Computational linguistics,
28(3):245–288.
Yoav Goldberg and Jon Orwant. 2013. A dataset of
syntactic-ngrams over time from a very large corpus of
english books. In Second Joint Conference on Lexical
and Computational Semantics, Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 241–247. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Thomas L Grifﬁths, Mark Steyvers, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. 2007. Topics in semantic representation. Psychological review, 114(2):211.
David R Hardoon, Sandor Szedmak, and John ShaweTaylor. 2004. Canonical correlation analysis: An
overview with application to learning methods. Neural Computation, 16(12):2639–2664.
Zellig Harris. 1954. Distributional structure. Word,
10(23):146–162.
Felix Hill, Anna Korhonen, and Christian Bentz.
2013. A quantitative empirical analysis of the abstract/concrete distinction. Cognitive Science.
Eric H Huang, Richard Socher, Christopher D Manning,
and Andrew Y Ng. 2012. Improving word representations via global context and multiple word prototypes.
In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Long PapersVolume 1, pages 873–882. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sabine Schulte Im Walde. 2006. Experiments on the
automatic induction of german semantic verb classes.
Computational Linguistics, 32(2):159–194.
Brendan T Johns and Michael N Jones. 2012. Perceptual
inference through global lexical similarity. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 4(1):103–120.
Colin Kelly, Barry Devereux, and Anna Korhonen. 2010.
Acquiring human-like feature-based conceptual representations from corpora. In Proceedings of the NAACL
HLT 2010 First Workshop on Computational Neurolinguistics, pages 61–69. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Douwe Kiela and Felix Hill. 2014. Improving multimodal representations using image dispersion: Why
less is sometimes more. In Proceedings of ACL 2014,
Baltimore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Karin Kipper, Anna Korhonen, Neville Ryant, and
Martha Palmer. 2008. A large-scale classiﬁcation of
english verbs. Language Resources and Evaluation,
42(1):21–40.

Thomas K Landauer and Susan T Dumais. 1997. A solution to plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis
theory of acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological review, 104(2):211.
Geoffrey Leech, Roger Garside, and Michael Bryant.
1994. Claws4: the tagging of the British National Corpus. In Proceedings of the 15th conference on Computational linguistics-Volume 1, pages 622–628. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Chee Wee Leong and Rada Mihalcea. 2011. Going beyond text: A hybrid image-text approach for measuring word relatedness. In IJCNLP, pages 1403–1407.
Christopher D Manning. 2011. Part-of-speech tagging
from 97% to 100%: is it time for some linguistics?
In Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, pages 171–189. Springer.
Arthur B Markman and Edward J Wisniewski. 1997.
Similar and different: The differentiation of basiclevel categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(1).
Ken McRae, George S Cree, Mark S Seidenberg, and
Chris McNorgan. 2005. Semantic feature production
norms for a large set of living and non-living things.
Behavior Research Methods, 37(4):547–559.
Raymond H Myers. 1990. Classical and modern regression with applications, volume 2. Duxbury Press Belmont, CA.
Douglas L Nelson, Cathy L McEvoy, and Thomas A
Schreiber. 2004. The University of South Florida free
association, rhyme, and word fragment norms. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
36(3):402–407.
Allan Paivio. 1991. Dual coding theory: Retrospect and
current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology/Revue
Canadienne de Psychologie, 45(3):255.
Ted Pedersen, Siddharth Patwardhan, and Jason Michelizzi. 2004. Wordnet:: Similarity: measuring the relatedness of concepts. In Demonstration Papers at HLTNAACL 2004, pages 38–41. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Roi Reichart and Anna Korhonen. 2013. Improved
lexical acquisition through dpp-based verb clustering.
In Proceedings of the Conference of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Roller and Sabine Schulte im Walde. 2013. A
multimodal LDA model integrating textual, cognitive
and visual modalities. In Proceedings of the 2013
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1146–1157, Seattle, Washington, USA, October. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Eleanor Rosch, Carolyn B Mervis, Wayne D Gray,
David M Johnson, and Penny Boyes-Braem. 1976.

Basic objects in natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8(3):382–439.
Gideon Rosen. 2001. Nominalism, naturalism, epistemic relativism. Noˆ s, 35(s15):69–91.
u
Magnus Sahlgren. 2006. The Word-Space Model: Using distributional analysis to represent syntagmatic
and paradigmatic relations between words in highdimensional vector spaces. Ph.D. thesis, Stockholm.
Paula J Schwanenﬂugel and Edward J Shoben. 1983.
Differential context effects in the comprehension of
abstract and concrete verbal materials. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9(1):82.
Carina Silberer and Mirella Lapata. 2012. Grounded
models of semantic representation. In Proceedings
of the 2012 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and Computational
Natural Language Learning, pages 1423–1433. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Carina Silberer, Vittorio Ferrari, and Mirella Lapata.
2013. Models of semantic representation with visual
attributes. In Proceedings of the 51th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Peter D Turney, Patrick Pantel, et al. 2010. From frequency to meaning: Vector space models of semantics.
Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research, 37(1):141–
188.
Tim Van de Cruys, Laura Rimell, Thierry Poibeau, Anna
Korhonen, et al. 2012. Multiway tensor factorization
for unsupervised lexical acquisition. COLING 2012:
Technical Papers, pages 2703–2720.
Luis Von Ahn and Laura Dabbish. 2004. Labeling images with a computer game. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 319–326. ACM.

